English-language GNU/Linux distributions on CD-ROM

(formerly: The Linux distributions HOWTO)

Martin S. Wheeler

[http://www.startext.co.uk/] StarTEXT document engineering

        Glastonbury
        England, UK
         msw@startext.co.uk
      

Copyright © 2001 by Martin S. Wheeler
Revision History                                                             
Revision v7.0    2000-01-31   Revised by: [mailto:msw@startext.co.uk]  msw   


This document is intended to show prospective users or administrators of a
GNU/Linux system the range of choices open to them when deciding on a
distribution for the first time. It also aims to help experienced users track
the state of the GNU/Linux distributions market. It emphatically does not aim
to be a complete list of all GNU/Linux distributions for all platforms and in
all languages. The focus is on popular English-language distributions;
specifically compiled for the Intel platform; available on CD-ROM; and easily
accessible to the first-time user.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
    1.1. Background
    1.2. New versions of this document
    1.3. Recent changes
    1.4. Overview of the Linux market
    1.5. Personal opinions
   
   
2. Best-known distributions
    2.1. Caldera OpenLinux
    2.2. Debian GNU/Linux
    2.3. Mandrake Linux
    2.4. Red Hat Linux
    2.5. Slackware Linux
    2.6. S.u.S.E. Linux
   
   
3. Other distributions
    3.1. KRUD - Kevin's Red Hat Uber Distribution
    3.2. Linux by Libranet
    3.3. LinuxGT
    3.4. Linux Pro
    3.5. Trans-Ameritech Linuxware
    3.6. Turbo Linux
    3.7. xxxxx Linux
   
   
4. Hall of Remembrance
    4.1. Corel Linux
   
   
5. Submissions for inclusion in this document
    5.1. Types of submissions
    5.2. How to submit
    5.3. Submission guidelines
   
   
6. Administrivia
    6.1. Terms of use
    6.2. Acknowledgements
   
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Introduction

1.1. Background

There is no one single authoritative master distribution of the GNU/Linux
operating system software suites. Instead, there are many such distributions
(over one hundred and sixty at the last count) ?? available over the net via
anonymous FTP; by mail order from various emporia; directly from the shelves
of your local bookshop or computer store; as a boxed set or as loose CD-ROMs;
as an insert in the back of a book; or as a cover disk on specialist
magazines.

The purpose of this document is to provide short summaries of those
English-language GNU/Linux CD-ROM distributions available as loose or as
boxed CD-ROM sets (with or without manuals); and to provide pointers for the
reader to find more information. Distributions in languages other than
English also exist, but are outwith the scope of this document.

The information presented here is in no way complete; i.e. there are
certainly more English-language distributions than all those listed in this
document. By the nature of open source software, anyone who changes anything
in their GNU/Linux installation and then makes that particular version
available to others can be said to be in some way creating a `distribution'.
A document such as this has to choose somewhere to draw the line between what
is, and what is not, suitable for consideration as a distinct distribution in
its own right. The editors have chosen `available on CD' as their simple
criterion.

Note that this is by no means the authoritative definition of a distribution.
There are numerous small distributions available on floppy disk that offer
things the big distributions don't ?? not the least of which is smallness
itself. A good list of such distributions is to be found at: [http://
www.toms.net/] Tom's rescue and boot disk site; or the [http://
www.fokus.gmd.de/linux-distrib-small.html] small distributions site.

The rationale behind producing this document in the first place ?? given that
there are very many similar texts to be found on the WWW at any one moment ??
is to provide a distributable version of the same information, accessible by
other than online means. (Not everyone who could use this information has
access to a telephone line or to the web.)

If you are associated with a CD-ROM distribution we don't list, please see 
Section 5 near the end of this document for information on making a
submission. It's easy to do and should take less than five minutes.

For a more complete list of distributions (albeit with perhaps slightly less
information on each), see the [http://www.linuxhq.com/dist-index.html] Linux
HQ distributions list; or the [http://www.fokus.gmd.de/
linux-distrib-full.html] full distributions site.

Disclaimer: We make absolutely no guarantee as to the correctness of the
information, prices, and ordering details given in this document. Check the
date-last-modified field of each distribution to get an idea of its currency,
then go to the vendor's web page for up-to-date information. Furthermore,
unless otherwise stated, all GNU/Linux software comes with ABSOLUTELY NO
WARRANTY.

The editor tries to stick to facts in most of this document, but ??
inevitably ?? has personal opinions on the state of the Linux market. You can
read these under Section 1.5.

Personal disclaimer: I [msw] have no financial connection with any Linux
vendor, nor have I accepted any remuneration or perquisites from any vendor.
No free disks for review; not even as much as a T-shirt. (But hey ?? I'm
always open to offers. XXL.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.2. New versions of this document

This document will be regularly posted to the newsgroup comp.os.linux.answers
The document is also archived on a number of Linux FTP sites, including
metalab.unc.edu in pub/Linux/docs/HOWTO.

You can also view the latest version of this document on the World Wide Web
via the url [http://www.startext.co.uk/msw/NEW_Distributions-HOWTO/
index.html] http://www.startext.co.uk/msw/NEW_Distributions-HOWTO/index.html.

Feel free to mail any questions or comments about this document to the
current editor, Martin Wheeler (msw@startext.co.uk). Please do not send
general Linux questions or requests for help in choosing a distribution
(unless you're willing to hire me at my commercial consultancy rates); I
don't have time to deal with them; and I try to put everything I know about
choosing a suitable distribution into this document.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.3. Recent changes

- details of individual distributions brought up to date

- text markup upgraded from DocBook 3.0 to DocBook 4.1

- division of distributions into two lists

- increased number of distributions covered

- inclusion of inline images for company logos

- added scope for inclusion of reviewers' remarks

The editorship and maintenance of this document was taken over from Eric S.
Raymond (esr@thyrsus.com) by Martin Wheeler in January 2001; and although
much of the original text has been retained, all controversial statements and
opinions should be considered solely those of the current editor.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.4. Overview of the Linux market

In the beginning (say 1993), a GNU/Linux distribution was something you
downloaded off the Internet onto floppies. Installation was a lengthy,
laborious and error-prone process; repeated frustrations due to bad
(magnetic-disk) media were common.

Then came cheap CD-ROM drives, and the cheap-to-produce CD-ROM ?? a medium
ideally suited for shipping large volumes of operating-system software at low
cost. A whole mini-industry has now built up around commercial CD-ROM GNU/
Linuxes; and because the vendors have the actual cash flow to fund support
and marketing these days, they have come to dominate the Linux world. Debian
is now the only significant non-commercial release; and despite the ease with
which software may be downloaded from the internet these days, even it seems
to be propagated to new users largely by the ubiquitous CD-ROM.

(In all fairness, it should be noted here that the rise in popularity of GNU/
Linux systems over the past five years has been due in no small measure to
the increased number of applications packages bundled with each distribution
?? from circa 400 in 1995 to just under 4,000 in 2000. What used to be
distributable on a single CD is now usually spread over four or six disks.
Downloading a `full' distribution is no longer a real option for most users,
whether experienced or novice.)

Most of the CD-ROM distributions (including Slackware, S.u.S.E. Debian and
Red Hat) are still available for FTP from the home sites of their developers.
But if you have a CD-ROM drive and a few euros to spare, you will have many
more distributions and more support options to choose from (and you'll
usually get some well-produced and useful paper documentation with it). For
more on the details of installation, see the Linux Installation HOWTO,
([http://www.linuxdoc.org/HOWTO/Installation-HOWTO/index.html] http://
www.linuxdoc.org/HOWTO/Installation-HOWTO/index.html).

Prices for CD-ROM distributions of Intel GNU/Linux software start at around 4
or 5 euros for a single disk, and can go all the way up to EUR 100 for a
boxed set, with manuals. (And those extra euros can buy real value.) Many
vendors also sell subscription deals that will lower your cost-per-CD for
regular updates over the subscription period. Prices may be even higher when
commercial packages (e.g. graphics or word-processing applications) are
bundled in with the basic distribution.

Price correlates with features and quality pretty well (as one would expect
in a very competitive market). I would personally recommend paying the few
extra euros for a top-drawer original CD-ROM distribution; this will pay off
in fewer installation and administration hassles down the road. (For example,
installation of S.u.S.E. 7.0 from DVD now takes little over 20 mins on a
fairly run-of-the-mill machine, with automatic detection of most network and
video cards. Compare that with the one-and-a-half hours it took me to install
my first copy of Linux-FT, which ?? at the time ?? I thought was a dream
installation.)

Making good choices is also much simpler than it used to be. In 1995-96 the
Linux market underwent a serious shakeout, with only a very few commercial
distributions emerging as leaders, while the weaker ones disappeared or
stagnated. (My own personal favourite at the time ?? Linux-FT ?? went down
without trace. RIP Unifix ?? welcome S.u.S.E.) The toll among general-purpose
non-commercial distributions has been even fiercer. Essentially, only Debian
(and derivatives) survive in this role.

As a result, the three-tier structure of primary distribution builders,
value-added repackagers, and bottom-feeding CD shovellers that used to define
the market has nearly collapsed. To be competitive in the third millennium, a
Linux vendor (whether commercial or non-commercial) has to offer reasonable
support and behave like a primary distribution builder, whether it really is
one or not.

As long as you look for a recent freeze date though, it is pretty hard to get
stuck with a duff distribution these days.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.5. Personal opinions

[msw1]

Martin Wheeler

In this section, I present my own opinions, for what they're worth. However,
there is no substitute for making your own evaluation, based on experience ??
plus the data in this guide, of course. These opinions are intended more to
show up any possible personal bias than as a guide to what anyone else should
do.

In the beginning was Slackware ?? usually to be found along with a few other
goodies on the cover disks of the more enlightened magazines. But from the
beginnings of the Linux (CD-ROM) industry circa 1993 until the autumn of
1995, Yggdrasil was top distribution ?? it essentially founded the CD-ROM
market in North America, then set the standard for everybody else. (In Europe
of course, Slackware reigned.) The previous editor of this document, Eric
Raymond, described how he used Yggdrasil, and recommended it over commercial
System V versions for its "superior documentation, large collection of
applications, and enlightened policy of sending free releases to open-source
authors, then dedicating part of the price of each CD-ROM to financially
supporting free software". Unfortunately, Yggdrasil hasn't issued a new
release since 1995, and they've now been left well behind by the market.

Personally, after playing with Slackware for a while, I toyed with the idea
of Yggdrasil, but instead moved on to a distribution which gave me what I
wanted at the time ?? my own personal webserver; an X interface; and enough
development and SGML editing tools to keep me happy for years. (Plus a rather
nice system which loaded and unloaded applications for me automatically,
according to how much I used them.) Unfortunately, Linux-FT was not to
endure; and in 1996 I finally settled on Debian as my ideal distribution, as
I had come to want more, and was also a far more experienced user by then.
There is an important point to be noted by first-time buyers here ?? go for
whatever distribution gives you what you most want at the time; then change
with your needs. The financial costs incurred in doing this are negligible.

In previous versions of this document, Eric Raymond wrote: "I now run Red Hat
Linux and am quite satisfied with it. They have successfully created a
de-facto standard in distribution packaging with RPM (now also used by SuSE
and Mandrake, among others). They've made most of the right moves at the
right times and I consider them the current market leader."

This may still be true for North America; but in Europe Red Hat is rapidly
falling into third place behind the very much more popular S.u.S.E. and
Mandrake distributions; and the "standard" RPM application packaging is
turning out to be not quite as standard as one might wish for ?? as RPMs from
one distribution do not necessarily always transfer to another.

Eric himself has now given up vanilla Red Hat and has written to tell me he's
been running the KRUD version for the last year and is very happy with it. It
just goes to show...

However, one of the major influences in decision-making for most newcomers to
GNU/Linux is not so much the number of useful packages included with any
distribution, but the perceived sexiness of the user interface it uses as its
default. (All distributions will run all X desktop environments and window
managers, given the right hardware resources ?? but not all distributions are
set to default on startup to the most attractive screen presentation for the
novice user.) Be aware of this when evaluating different distributions ?? it
is surprising how many potential new users interpret the sizzle as the steak.

But if you're ideologically wedded to using a non-commercial distribution,
Debian seems to be the clear choice: the only one left with a serious support
team behind it, and a rock-solid package management system, allowing
trouble-free translation to and from other package management systems.

Certainly, in my own experience, Debian suits my personal needs best.
Nevertheless, despite any efforts I might make to persuade them otherwise, my
commercial clients invariably plump for S.u.S.E. or Mandrake as their choice
of first distribution. (As ever, it's a case of horses for courses.)

These opinions should certainly not be interpreted as an unconditional
endorsement; different Linux distributions are optimized for different needs,
and yours may well be best served by some other distribution (especially if,
unlike us, you're mainly a DOS user and are looking for a distribution tuned
for dual-boot systems and being launched from DOS).

Furthermore, industry standing is volatile. By the time you read this,
Debian, S.u.S.E. or Red Hat may well have fallen out of favour or fashion,
and been displaced by hungrier newcomers offering more and better features.
(And the obligatory sexier graphical interface of course.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Best-known distributions

(listed in alphabetical order)

The handful of distributions listed here are those which are most widely
known by the general public, or referred to most often by the specialist
media, or those most commonly found in retail outlets in English-speaking
countries. What exact sales percentage of the total GNU/Linux distributions
market they represent is unknown ?? but it is certainly extremely high.
Between them, they account for almost all that the (generally uninformed)
public knows about "Linux".
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1. Caldera OpenLinux

Name:
    Caldera OpenLinux
   
Distributor:
                Caldera, Inc.
                633 South 550 East
                Provo, Utah 84606
        
   
                E-mail: [mailto:info@caldera.com] info@caldera.com
                WWW: [http://www.caldera.com/] http://www.caldera.com/
                FTP: [ftp://ftp.caldera.com] ftp://ftp.caldera.com
                Vox: (801)-377-7678
                Fax: (801)-377-8752
        
   
Provider's description:
    Caldera logo
   
    Caldera is shipping OpenLinux 1.2 in a three-tiered family of products:
    OpenLinux Lite, OpenLinux Base, and OpenLinux Standard.
   
    OpenLinux Lite is a freely available evaluation of the OpenLinux product
    (it includes a 90-day evaluation of the Caldera integrated desktop ?? the
    full licensed version of the desktop is included in the Base and Standard
    products). OpenLinux Lite can be downloaded from Caldera's ftp site, or
    obtained on CD for the cost of shipping. It is also designed for use by
    book and software publishers to provide a commercially stable Linux
    offering with their books and software products.
   
    OpenLinux Base contains everything that is in Lite plus it is a complete,
    easy-to-install Linux operating system, with integrated desktop, Internet
    client and server components, and Intranet connectivity. OpenLinux Base
    includes Netscape Navigator and full documentation.
   
    OpenLinux Standard includes what is in Base plus more high-end, name
    brand, commercial software components (such as Netscape FastTrack Web
    Server, Netscape Navigator Gold Web browser and authoring tools, ADABAS D
    database, StarOffice productivity suite, Caldera OpenDOS, and NetWare
    client and administration tools).
   
    All three tiers of the OpenLinux 1.2 release are currently available.
   
    With Caldera OpenLinux, you can see a whole world of powerful new
    computing, even the power of a UNIX workstation on your PC! By using a
    Linux kernel, OpenLinux gives you speed and stability that compare to
    systems costing thousands of dollars. Open Linux also gives you:
   
      + Real multi-tasking runs many text or graphical applications at once;
        no application can cause another to crash, unlike less robust
        systems.
       
      + The Linux 2.0 kernel gives super-fast TCP/IP access to the Internet,
        plus loadable device drivers, for the most efficient use of your
        system resources.
       
      + Easy-to-follow, quick installation with menu-based choices and
        auto-detection of your hardware make installation a snap on most
        systems. The Getting Started Guide (included) provides a step-by-step
        illustrated procedure, with troubleshooting tips.
       
   
    No other Linux system includes a complete, integrated desktop interface
    with configuration tools and graphical editor. Its powerful drag-and-drop
    capabilities come pre-configured with thousands of icons and application
    settings. The Desktop provides a convenient place where you can store
    your favorite programs and data files for instant access. The Desktop
    gives you:
   
      + Drag-and-drop launching of programs with data files.
       
      + An integrated graphical text editor.
       
      + Easy access to an array of powerful system configuration tools.
       
      + A configurable icon bar, custom layouts, and preference settings.
       
      + Powerful file management using drag-and-drop or graphical dialogs.
       
   
Internet access:
                WWW: [http://www.caldera.com/] http://www.caldera.com/
                FTP: [ftp://ftp.caldera.com] ftp://ftp.caldera.com
                
   
Ordering:
    By e-mail with PGP key, by phone, by fax, or by conventional mail. Full
    ordering details are at [http://www.caldera.com/mpro/orinfo/
    orderinfo.html] http://www.caldera.com/mpro/orinfo/orderinfo.html.
   
Support:
    Caldera is one of the only Linux distributors to offer E-mail and
    telephone support. OpenLinux Base (E-mail only) and Standard (Telephone
    and E-mail) users are fully supported (Standard users receive 5 free
    incident calls during the first 30 days). There is no technical support
    for the Lite product.
   
    OpenLinux Base and Standard ship with full licensed versions of the
    Caldera Desktop, which do not expire. OpenLinux Lite ships with a 90-day
    evaluation version of the Desktop.
   
Last freeze date:
   
Entry last modified:
    21 January 2001
   
Reviewer's comments:
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.2. Debian GNU/Linux

Name:
    Debian GNU/Linux
   
Distributor:
                Software in the Public Interest, Inc.
                PO Box 1326
                Boston, Ma. 02117 USA
        
   
                Net: [mailto:info@debian.org] info@debian.org
                WWW: [http://www.debian.org/] http://www.debian.org/
                FTP: [ftp://ftp.debian.org/debian] ftp://ftp.debian.org/
    debian
        
   
Provider's description:
    Debian logo
   
    Debian GNU/Linux is the result of a volunteer effort to create a
    high-quality non-commercial Linux distribution. Debian GNU/Linux 2.2 is a
    complete and fully-functional Unix-compatible operating system for the
    personal computer. It contains around 4000 packages, making it by far the
    largest free software distribution.
   
    Debian GNU/Linux is available for the IBM PC architecture (386/486/
    Pentium), m68k, SPARC, Alpha, PowerPC, and ARM. Ports to MIPS, HP
    PA-RISC, IA64 and GNU/Hurd are under way.
   
    Debian GNU/Linux is an easy-to-upgrade distribution that consists of
    freely redistributable software from a number of different sources and
    systems. Non-free packages may also obtained, making Debian a
    well-rounded system.
   
    The benefits of Debian GNU/Linux are its upgradability, well-defined
    dependencies between packages, and its open development. It is the only
    GNU/Linux distribution that is being developed co-operatively by many
    individuals over the Internet, in the same spirit as the Linux kernel and
    other open-source operating systems. More than 500 package maintainers
    are working on over 5000 packages and improving Debian GNU/Linux. A
    sophisticated bug tracking system allows users to easily report bugs and
    security concerns which are quickly dealt with by the Debian community. A
    command-line tool, 'apt-get', can be used to dynamically upgrade your
    system from the large Debian archive network.
   
    Debian GNU/Linux is a very dynamic distribution, although it does prefer
    well-tested stability to having the very latest available. Major releases
    are generally made about every year, although the Debian archives are
    updated daily; and upgrading discrete elements of the system is a common
    and supported operation.
   
    For more information about Debian GNU/Linux, please visit our World Wide
    Web page at [http://www.debian.org/] http://www.debian.org/. There is
    also a book, Running Debian GNU/Linux, from O'Reilly & Associates.
   
    If you're interested in joining this project, you are invited to
    subscribe to either debian-user@lists.debian.org, or
    debian-devel@lists.debian.org by sending a mail to [mailto:
    debian-user-request@lists.debian.org]
    debian-user-request@lists.debian.org (or [mailto:
    debian-devel-request@lists.debian.org] debian-devel-request respectively)
    with the word "help" in the subject line.
   
Internet access:
    Debian GNU/Linux is available for download via anonymous FTP or HTTP; see
    [http://www.debian.org/distrib/ftplist/] http://www.debian.org/distrib/
    ftplist/.
   
Ordering:
    A number of [http://www.debian.org/distrib/vendors/] vendors can provide
    CD-ROMs or snapshots.
   
Support:
    Aside from self-serve [http://www.debian.org/support/] support via
    mailing lists, IRC, or the online Bug Tracking System, there is also a
    number of [http://www.debian.org/consultants/] consultants providing
    support.
   
Last freeze date:
    5 December 2000 (2.2r2)
   
Entry last modified:
    31 January 2001
   
Reviewer's comments:
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.3. Mandrake Linux

Name:
    Mandrake Linux
   
Distributor:
                MandrakeSoft
                Daniel Morales - MandrakeSoft 818.834.9860
                Caroline Carmagnol - Alizé Public Relations 650.323.1607
                <mandrake@linux-mandrake.com>
        
   
                Net: [mailto:mandrake@linux-mandrake.com]
    mandrake@linux-mandrake.com (orders)
                WWW: [http://www.linux-mandrake.com] http://
    www.linux-mandrake.com
                Vox: 818.834.9860
        
   
Provider's description:
    mandrake logo
   
    Mandrake is inspired by Red Hat(tm) Linux, with many improvements and
    pre-configured applications which make it easier to use for beginners,
    and faster for everyone.
   
    Mandrake is available both in GPL Edition and in the PowerPack Edition
    which includes 5 CDs and commercial applications. The GPL Edition CD
    (base system and applications) is freely available from the Internet as
    an iso image.
   
    Mandrake 6.0 won two LinuxWorld Editors' Choice Awards and was a runner
    up at LinuxWorld Expo, San Jose, CA in August 1999:
   
     1. Best Linux Product of the Year.
       
     2. Best Distribution/Server.
       
     3. finalist for Best Distribution/Client.
       
   
    Mandrake 6.1 (Helios) features:
   
     1. Linux-Kernel: 2.2.13 (pre4)
       
     2. XFree86: 3.3.5
       
     3. Glibc: 2.1.1
       
     4. RPM: 3.0.3
       
     5. Bash: 2.03
       
     6. KDE: 1.1.2 (with Mandrake customization)
       
     7. Gnome: built from 1.0.4->1.0.14 versions (with Mandrake
        customization)
       
     8. Enlightenment 0.16-dev5, Windowmaker 0.60, AfterStep 1.7.111, XFCE
        3.0.2, IceWM 0.9.48
       
   
    and many applications such as Apache, MySQL etc.
   
    In Mandrake, packages have been compiled with CPU optimizations for
    pentium-class (intel, amd, cyrix, winchip...) and higher processors
    resulting in speed improvements up to 30%.
   
Internet access:
    [http://www.linux-mandrake.com/en/ftp.php3] http://www.linux-mandrake.com
    /en/ftp.php3
   
Ordering:
    Free download available from Internet. The Linux-Mandrake PowerPack price
    is typically between $45 and $50. Payment method depends on the
    distributor. Distributor lists available at: [http://
    www.linux-mandrake.com/en/fsinglecd.php3] http://www.linux-mandrake.com/
    en/fsinglecd.php3.
   
Support:
    The PowerPack is provided with 100 days of support by e-mail.
   
    Several specialized mailing-lists and a USENET newsgroup
    (alt.os.linux.mandrake) are available for support between users.
   
    Bynari Systems Group and LinuxCare also provide complete support for
    Mandrake.
   
Last freeze date:
    Sep 17, 1999 for Mandrake 6.1 (Helios). Update frequency: about 4 months.
   
Entry last modified:
    18 September 1999
   
Reviewer's comments:
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.4. Red Hat Linux

Name:
    Red Hat Linux
   
Distributor:
        Red Hat Software
                3201 Yorktown Rd, Suite 123 DeKalb Center
                Durham, NC 27713
        
   
                Vox: (800) 546-7274 or (919) 572-6500
                Fax: (919) 572-6726
                Net: [mailto:redhat@redhat.com] redhat@redhat.com
                WWW: [http://www.redhat.com/] http://www.redhat.com/
                FTP: [ftp://ftp.redhat.com] ftp://ftp.redhat.com
        
   
Provider's description:
    Red Hat logo
   
    Red Hat 6.1 is based on the 2.2 kernel and is available for Intel, Sparc
    and Alpha platforms.
   
    Four installation innovations make Red Hat the easiest Linux to install
    ever. Our graphical installation mode brings you straight up into X for
    most of the installation. Our boot disk creation script eases selection
    of the proper boot disk, and it saves your existing network configuration
    information and XF86Config so you don't have to configure TCP/IP or X!
    Our FTP install allows you to install simply by downloading 3 floppy disk
    images ?? the rest is done automatically! And finally, the installation
    includes seamless support for PCMCIA devices ?? install Red Hat on your
    laptop as easily as on your desktop machine!
   
    After installing Red Hat Linux once, you will never need to reinstall
    Linux again! The new RPM packaging system is sophisticated enough to
    allow upgrading to new Red Hat releases without reinstalling your system
    - no partitioning, no backing up all your files, no headaches.
   
Internet access:
   
Ordering:
    Available directly from Red Hat Software and most distributors of Linux
    related products. Please contact Red Hat Software for ordering details
    (on-line ordering is available through Red Hat's Web). Suggested retail
    price for the Standard version is $29.95; for the Professional (server)
    version $149.95; for the Deluxe version $79.95.
   
Support:
   
Last freeze date:
    Unknown.
   
Entry last modified:
    1 Nov 1999.
   
Reviewer's comments:
    The big selling point of this distribution is RPM, the Red Hat Package
    Manager. This piece of software is a remarkable advance; it allows you to
    cleanly install and de-install applications and operating-system
    components, including the kernel and OS base itself. RPM is now used as
    well by essentially all other distributions except Debian. [esr]
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.5. Slackware Linux

Name:
    Slackware Linux
   
Distributor:
                Walnut Creek CDROM
                4041 Pike Lane, Suite D
                Concord, CA  94520
        
   
                Net: [mailto:info@cdrom.com] info@cdrom.com (information),
                     [mailto:order@cdrom.com] order@cdrom.com (orders),
                     [mailto:support@cdrom.com] support@cdrom.com (support).
                
   
Provider's description:
    Slackware logo
   
    Ftp.cdrom.com is the home of Slackware Linux. We are the publishers of
    the Official Slackware Linux CDROM. Our distribution is a 4-disc set with
    the current version being Slackware 96. The current disc is based on the
    2.0.34 kernel.
   
    Slackware Linux is a full-featured distribution of the Linux operating
    system designed for 386/486 computers with a 3.5" floppy and CD-ROM
    drive.
   
Internet access:
                WWW: [http://www.cdrom.com/titles/os/slack96.htm] http://
    www.cdrom.com/titles/os/slack96.htm
                FTP: [ftp:ftp.cdrom.com/pub/linux/slackware] ftp:
    ftp.cdrom.com/pub/linux/slackware
        
   
Ordering:
    The cost of the CD-ROM set from Walnut Creek is $39.95.
   
Support:
   
Last freeze date:
    July 1998 (3.5)
   
Entry last modified:
    13 August 1998.
   
Reviewer's comments:
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.6. S.u.S.E. Linux

Name:
    S.u.S.E. Linux
   
Distributor:
                S.u.S.E., Inc.
                458 Santa Clara Ave
                Oakland CA 94610 USA
        
   
                Net: [mailto:info@suse.com] info@suse.com
                WWW: [http://www.suse.com] http://www.suse.com/
                FTP: [ftp://ftp.suse.com] ftp://ftp.suse.com
                Vox: +1-510-835-7873
                Fax: +1-510-835-7875 fax
        
   
Provider's description:
    S.u.S.E. logo
   
    S.u.S.E. Linux offers users of all levels, from novice to expert, quick
    and easy entry into the world of Linux and Unix. Resources such as a
    menu-driven installation from CD-ROM, a modular boot diskette, 400-page
    reference book and S.u.S.E.'s own system administration tool YaST, allow
    one to quickly get Linux installed and running, and to keep it running
    smoothly.
   
    Furthermore, S.u.S.E. offers a series of supported X servers, which
    support the newest graphics cards. These servers are created in
    co-operation with the XFree86 (tm) development team. See the following
    url for more details: [http://www.suse.de/XSuSE/] http://www.suse.de/
    XSuSE/.
   
    New in S.u.S.E. Linux 5.3:
   
      + Kernel 2.0.35
       
      + KDE 1.0
       
      + GIMP 1.0
       
      + SaX (SuSE advanced XF86 configuration tool)
       
   
    Quick overview of other features:
   
      + The Linux OS, over 875 software packages, including complete sources
        and live file system on 4 CD-ROMs
       
      + 400 page reference book
       
      + Packages in RPM format; TGZ packages installable
       
      + System V compatible boot concept, compliance with file system
        standard
       
      + Installation and administration utility 'YaST' configures network,
        ISDN, e-mail, printer, X Window System
       
      + S.u.S.E. X servers which support new graphics cards
       
      + Administration of file systems, users, groups
       
      + Automatic configuration of several window managers
       
      + Online help system and documentation
       
      + Demo mode, either directly from CD-ROM, or on DOS partition
       
   
Internet access:
   
Ordering:
    You can download from [ftp://ftp.suse.com/pub/SuSE-Linux] ftp://
    ftp.suse.com/pub/SuSE-Linux. For the CD-ROM with support, order vphone,
    secure WWW order form, fax, or post. Price is $49.95, or $34.95 per
    edition by subscription. Use order code LSUE520 for the English version,
    LSUD520.
   
    Also available: OSF Motif 2.1 for $129.95 (price for update to be
    determined; order code: LMEA210
   
Support:
    60 days of free installation support are included with each purchase of
    S.u.S.E. Linux. See the web page for contact info and conditions.
   
Last freeze date:
    Unknown.
   
Entry last modified:
    13 Aug 1998 (5.3)
   
Reviewer's comments:
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Other distributions

All these distributions are available on CD-ROM (some of the non-commercial
ones only show up on network-archive snapshots). Most of these are available
for free over the network (but the commercial ones won't support you if you
buy this way). They are custom-assembled, rather than just being
re-packagings of a pre-existing network release.

They are listed in alphabetical order.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1. KRUD - Kevin's Red Hat Uber Distribution

Name:
    KRUD
   
Distributor:
               tummy.com, ltd
               200A North College Avenue
               Fort Collins CO 80524
              
   
               Net: [mailto:info@tummy.com] info@tummy.com
               WWW: [http://www.tummy.com/krud/] http://www.tummy.com/krud
               FTP: [ftp://ftp.tummy.com] ftp://ftp.tummy.com
               Vox: (970)-494-0355
               Fax: (408)-490-2728
              
   
Provider's description:
    KRUD logo
   
    KRUD is a monthly updated distribution based on Red Hat. It includes all
    of the current Red Hat distribution with full errata, and is available by
    subscription or as a single CD. Also included are a variety of useful
    packages for Linux, including several security-related packages such as
    ssh and isinglass. These additions are hand-selected by the author of the
    Linux Security HOWTO. Requires standard RedHat-compatible hardware.
    Currently, KRUD is not for export because it contains crypto software.
   
Internet access:
    Available on CD-ROM only because of export restrictions.
   
    http://www.tummy.com/krud/
   
Ordering:
    KRUD is available on CD. You can purchase a 12 month subscription for
    $65, a single issue for $7. Special rates available for subscription
    renewals. International shipping available.
   
    [https://www.tummy.com/krud/onlineorder.html] https://www.tummy.com/krud/
    onlineorder.html (online) [http://www.tummy.com/krud/mailorder.html]
    http://www.tummy.com/krud/mailorder.htm (by mail) $7/US each $65/US 12
    issue subscription (monthly update). Visa/Mastercard/Discover/Amex credit
    cards accepted. University and large business purchase orders. Postal
    money orders are also accepted.
   
Support:
    tummy.com is a full service Linux consulting firm. KRUD support is
    available on an hourly or contract basis from tummy.com, Ltd. Rates start
    at $150/hour.
   
    KRUD helps you keep up with the flood of errata and package upgrades by
    offering a monthly CD-ROM subscription delivered to you at a reasonable
    price.
   
Last freeze date:
    KRUD is updated monthly. Most recent version is dated 2001-01-01.
   
Entry last modified:
    2001-01-30
   
Reviewer's comments:
    (coming shortly)
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.2. Linux by Libranet

Name:
    Linux by Libranet
   
Distributor:
                Libra Computer Systems Ltd.
                1860 Langworthy Street
                North Vancouver, BC
                V7K 1N8
        
   
                Net: [mailto:sales@libranet.com] sales@libranet.com (orders)
                Net: [mailto:support@libranet.com] support@libranet.com 
    (support)
                Net: [mailto:faq@libranet.com] faq@libranet.com (faq)
                WWW: [http://www.libranet.com/] http://www.libranet.com/
        
   
Provider's description:
    Libranet logo
   
    Based on the Debian distribution, it allows users to start with an
    already configured desktop complete with the most commonly used
    applications. The simple installation gets the system up and running
    easily. This is a major benefit to those new to Linux and a great
    time-saver for the experienced.
   
Internet access:
     
   
Ordering:
    Available on CD for intel i386 and higher compatibles. Order via the web
    at http://www.libranet.com or fax/mail order One year free support via
    email and fax.
   
Support:
    The Linux by Libranet Desktop brings Debian, traditionally the choice of
    developers, to the desktop user.
   
Last freeze date:
    Updated CD about every 4 months.
   
Entry last modified:
    1 November 1999
   
Reviewer's comments:
     
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.3. LinuxGT

Name:
    LinuxGT
   
Distributor:
                Grey Technology
                PMB 205
                2479 Murphreesboro Rd.
                Nashville, TN 37217
        
   
                Net: [mailto:rick@greysite.com] rick@greysite.com (orders)
                WWW: [http://www.greysite.com/] http://www.greysite.com/
                FTP: [ftp://metalab.unc.edu/pub/Linux/distributions/linuxGT]
    ftp://metalab.unc.edu/pub/Linux/distributions/linuxGT
        
   
Provider's description:
    LinuxGT logo
   
    LinuxGT is based in the Linux 2.2 kernel, available for Intel only at
    this point, a PPC and SPARC are on the way! With a simple, to the point
    installation, we believe it is the easiest to get running server
    solutions available today! Creating a boot disk is a simple click of a
    button (from Windows), or running a simple script (DOS/Linux). Other
    installation methods are via ftp, http, NFS, or from your existing hard
    disk partition. By following the steps in the QuickStart Guide, you can't
    go wrong, most people won't NEED the Guide if they have ANY familiarity
    with Linux. Further product information can be found at our website
    (http://www.greysite.com) or via e-mail.
   
Internet access:
     
   
Ordering:
    Available through Grey Technologies, GT Partners, and Distribution
    Vendors. Please contact Grey Technology for ordering details (on-line
    ordering is available through GreySite.Com). Suggested retail price is
    for the Intel Server version is $dollar;24.95. Other platforms will be
    priced at time of availability.
   
Support:
    Technical support is available via telephone, e-mail, chatroom, or online
    Web Forum.
   
Last freeze date:
    24 Jun 1999
   
Entry last modified:
    24 Jun 1999
   
Reviewer's comments:
     
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.4. Linux Pro

Name:
    Linux Pro
   
Distributor:
                WorkGroup Solutions, Inc.
                P.O. Box 460190
                Aurora, CO 80046-0190
        
   
                Vox: (303)-699-7470
                Fax: (303)-699-2793
                Net: [mailto:info@wgs.com] info@wgs.com (orders)
                FTP: [ftp://ftp.wgs.com/pub2/wgs] ftp://ftp.wgs.com/pub2/wgs
        
   
Provider's description:
    Linux PRO logo
   
    The charter of the WGS Linux Pro CD is different from all other
    distributions currently on the market. We are actively pursuing
    penetration into the commercial marketplace for Linux. Everything we do
    is aimed at increasing the size of the Linux community, and helping Linux
    to become THE one true operating system, not just an operating system.
   
    WGS Linux Pro consists of our Main "Stable" Linux CD, for which we select
    what we consider to be the best Linux distribution available. Then we
    make bug fixes & minor enhancements. This CD often contains software
    older than the latest, under the theory that "the latest is not always
    the greatest". Together with this approach we provide technical support
    as well as support agreements. For this reason WGS Linux Pro is
    considered a primary Linux distribution. Optionally, and in addition to
    our primary CD, we supply supplemental CDs containing all the latest
    Linux software (including current archives of the tsx-11, metalab, and
    Red Hat sites). Virtually anything you will get with anyone's Linux
    product can be found on these supplemental CDs. We continually add more
    to these supplemental CDs as software becomes available. Even with all
    this, pricing on our product line is very favorable when correctly
    compared to other Linux distributions. Also optional (included with Linux
    Pro+) is a professionally produced and printed manual containing the
    Linux documentation project and more!
   
    Current version is 4.0a; kernel is 1.2.13 with installable 2.0.x on the
    CD.
   
Internet access:
    Look in [http://www.wgs.com/] http://www.wgs.com/ for a list of WGS
    products, and latest information on the CD-ROM.
   
Ordering:
    WGS Linux Pro is available on CD from dealers and distributors worldwide,
    and soon from our FTP site.
   
    You may call, fax, email, or mail us, to purchase, or request additional
    information. We will be happy to respond to any question you have. We
    accept American Express, Visa, Discover, and MasterCard, or purchase
    orders with approval of credit.
   
Support:
    Complete information is available on our FTP site.
   
    WGS publishes a free E-Mail newsletter on Linux and FlagShip to which you
    may subscribe by just emailing us your request.
   
    In addition we carry Motif, FlagShip, A line of books, and other products
    to make your experience with Linux more complete and fulfilling. Check us
    out!
   
Last freeze date:
    1 October 1996.
   
Entry last modified:
    13 March 1997
   
Reviewer's comments:
    They describe their current distribution as "Red Hat 3.03 plus".
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.5. Trans-Ameritech Linuxware

Name:
    Linuxware
   
Distributor:
              Trans-Ameritech
              2342A Walsh Avenue
              Santa Clara, CA 95051
              
   
              Net: [mailto:info@trans-am.com] info@trans-am.com
              WWW: http://www.trans-am.com
              Vox: (408)-727-3883
              Fax: (408)-727-3882
              BBS: (408)-980-9840
              
   
Provider's description:
    Linuxware logo
   
    Trans-Ameritech has published 10 releases of Linux by early 1997.
    Traditionally, Trans-Ameritech has set new standards for combining ease
    of use and straightforward installation, even for a first-time user, with
    its line of LinuxWare CD-ROMs. This is a flexible, easy-to-install
    operating system geared toward those interested in learning Unix as well
    as technical people, students and home PC users.
   
      + New Linux users will appreciate a Windows-based set up program from
        the CD.
       
      + To minimize the possibility of hardware conflicts many extra kernels
        are provided for different configurations. They are usable for
        installation and normal operation.
       
      + Many on-line documents are provided for quick reference, including
        the Linux Documentation Project files in source, dvi and ps formats.
       
   
    Many applications are included:
   
      + MS-Windows based X configuration program
       
      + C/C++,Pascal and Ada compilers as well as converters fron Fortran
       
      + TCP/IP networking, UUCP, SLIP, CSLIP, PPP
       
      + Internet access with binaries and sources for FTP, Telnet, News and
        E-mail
       
      + Multiple terminals and X-Windows environment
       
      + Gnu and international versions of the ispell spell-checker
       
      + The communications apps: term, minicom, Seyon (X-Windows based)
       
      + Editors: elvis (vi clone), joe, jove, Emacs
       
      + PostScript clone ghostscript
       
      + Object oriented GNU Smalltalk and the Smalltalk interface to X
       
      + TCL/Tk (Powerful scripting language with Motif-like X interface)
       
      + Programs for electrical engineers and ham enthusiasts
       
      + Interviews libraries,include files and doc Word-processor and idraw
        drawing program
       
      + Typesetting: TeX, LaTeX, xdvi, dvips, Metafont, groff
       
      + Andrew multimedia word processor with hyperlinks
       
      + FAX send and receive on either class 1 or class 2 fax modems
       
      + DOOM for game enthusiasts
       
   
    All the sources are available on the CD-ROM. The often needed sources are
    uncompressed and can be used directly from the CD-ROM.
   
    An uncompressed Linux filesystem is available for references and disk
    space conversaion. You can run programs directly from the CD-ROM! There
    is a large info directory for on-line reference and many manpages.
   
    For hacker's reference, uncompressed FreeBSD and netBSD sources are
    provided.
   
    Our distribution is targeted for Windows and DOS users who want an easy
    migration path upwards, rather than for UNIX experts.
   
Internet access:
     
   
Ordering:
    Email orders are taken at [mailto:order@trans-am.com] order@trans-am.com
   
    The price for our current release of LinuxWare 2.5 is $19.95
   
    The price for a package order: LinuxWare 2.5,Supplement 5 and Supplement
    4 (Ultimate LinuxWare Bundle) in one shipment is $30
   
    If you order with a credit card (VISA, MC, AmEx, Discovery), please,
    indicate the card number, expiration date and your mailing address.
   
    Shipping and handling in US: single CD-ROM or Ultimate LinuxWare Bundle
    is $5(first class US mail).
   
    Overseas shipping is $8 for single CD-ROM , $12 for the bundle.
   
    COD is available in the US only for $4.50. California residents, please
    add 7.75% sales tax.
   
    Annual subscription (4 releases) is available for $80 plus S&H (note:
    there are 4 shipments in a subscription). Example: subscription in US is:
    $80+$5x4=$100. Subscription in Europe/Japan etc. $80 + $8x4 = $112.
   
Support:
    If you have any further questions,please contact us through E-mail:
    info@trans-am.com or order@trans-am.com.
   
Last freeze date:
    January 1997 (Supplement 5)
   
Entry last modified:
    13 August 1998
   
Reviewer's comments:
     
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.6. Turbo Linux

Name:
    Turbo Linux
   
Distributor:
              TurboLinux, Inc.
              2000 Sierra Point Parkway
              Suite 401
              Brisbane, CA 94005
              
   
              Net: [mailto:info@turbolinux.com] info@turbolinux.com (orders)
              WWW: [http://www.turbolinux.com/] http://www.turbolinux.com/
              FTP: [ftp://ftp.turbolinux.com/] ftp://ftp.turbolinux.com/
              Vox: (650)-244-7777
              Fax: 650-244-7766
              
   
Provider's description:
    Turbo Linux logo
   
    TurboLinux makes a suite of high-performance Linux products for the
    workstation and server markets. Our products are available from our Web
    site, at more than 3,000 retail stores in North America and from our
    value-added reseller partners around the world. Our products:
   
    Workstation 6.0
        TurboLinux Workstation 6.0 is your high-performance choice for Linux
        on the desktop. The powerful office productivity suite StarOffice
        gives you full Microsoft Office compatibility and Netscape gets you
        quickly online for e-mail and Web surfing.
       
    Server 6.0
        TurboLinux Server 6.0, completely re-engineered as a secure,
        high-performance backend server for business workgroups in the
        enterprise, now includes robust e-commerce software for
        business-to-business transactions.
       
    TurboCluster Server 4.0
        Build affordable, scalable and available server clusters (25+ cluster
        nodes!) with TurboCluster Server 4.0, voted Best Web Solution by the
        editors of Linux Journal. TurboCluster Server, also named Corporate
        IT Best Product winner for enterprise-class customers at the IT 2000
        Sydney computer show, integrates seamlessly into your existing IT
        environment to cluster Solaris and Windows NT server nodes as well as
        Linux..
       
    enFuzion 6.0>
        Turn your existing network into a supercomputer! Based on a simple
        but powerful concept called parametric execution, enFuzion turns your
        existing computer network into a high speed, fault tolerant, highly
        available supercomputer.
       
   
   
Internet access:
     
   
Ordering:
    See [http://www.turbolinux.com/products/] http://www.turbolinux.com/
    products/ TurboLinux is also offered in retail stores and many online
    stores.
   
Support:
   
Last freeze date:
    Workstation 6.0 - January 3. Server 6.0 - January 3. TurboCluster Server
    - October 4.
   
    Estimated update frequency can vary from 2 weeks to 3 months depending on
    the product.
   
Entry last modified:
    22 Mar 2000.
   
Reviewer's comments:
     
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.7. xxxxx Linux

Name:
    xxxxx Linux
   
Distributor:
                xxxxxxxxxxx
                xxxxxxxxxxx
                xxxxxxxxxxx
        
   
                Net: [mailto:info@xxx.com] info@xxx.com
                WWW: [http://www.xxx.com] http://www.xxx.com
                FTP: [ftp://ftp.xxx.com] ftp://ftp.xxx.com
                Vox: (000)-000-1234
                Fax: (000)-000-1234
        
   
Provider's description:
    xxxxx Linux logo
   
   
Internet access:
   
Ordering:
   
Support:
   
Last freeze date:
     
   
Entry last modified:
     
   
Reviewer's comments:
     
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Hall of Remembrance

The distributions listed in this section are no longer maintained. They are
included here for historical reasons, and for those who may be attempting to
locate information about the distribution.

They are listed in alphabetical order.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1. Corel Linux

Name:
    Corel Linux
   
Distributor:
                xxxxxxxxxxx
                xxxxxxxxxxx
                xxxxxxxxxxx
        
   
                Net: [mailto:info@xxx.com] info@xxx.com
                WWW: [http://www.xxx.com] http://www.xxx.com
                FTP: [ftp://ftp.xxx.com] ftp://ftp.xxx.com
                Vox: (000)-000-1234
                Fax: (000)-000-1234
        
   
Provider's description:
    Corel logo
   
   
Internet access:
   
Ordering:
   
Support:
   
Last freeze date:
     
   
Entry last modified:
     
   
Reviewer's comments:
     
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Submissions for inclusion in this document

We encourage anyone and everyone who maintains a Linux distribution or mail
order service, to submit information on their service to this document. It's
easy and fun, and it's free advertising. This document is posted to many
places and is archived (see the next section).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.1. Types of submissions

We are interested in submissions for:

  * Complete distributions of GNU/Linux software available on CD-ROM. (We no
    longer carry FTP-only distributions, as this document is aimed primarily
    at new users for whom such a means of distribution is not appropriate.)
    By `complete distribution' we mean any set of software which can be used
    to build a complete GNU/Linux system from scratch.
   
  * Layered products or individual software packages available only via mail
    order. If your software package is available via anonymous FTP, chances
    are people can find it. Software products only available via mail-order
    include commercial things such as Motif, and any other commercial
    software ported to Linux.
   
  * Any other Linux-specific goods available via mail order, such as
    Linux-specific books and documentation, T-shirts, and assorted
    paraphernalia. Note: our interest in the latter categories is marginal ??
    this is a Linux Distributions HOWTO, not a catalogue of cutesy Linux
    junk. Whatever you're selling will have to be (a) very useful, (b) very
    original, or (c) very funny, to get listed here.
   

If the number of submissions for services and layered products is large,
we'll create a separate document for these items.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2. How to submit

To submit an entry to this document, please send mail to msw@startext.co.uk
with the following information. This format is not machine-parsable; any of
the fields may be any length that you wish, but I'd like to keep each entry
down to, say, 50 lines.

Name:
    - name of service or distribution
   
Distributor:
    - name of company, person, etc. who distributes/maintains the service or
    distribution. Should include mail, e-mail, phone contact information, and
    (if possible) a WWW reference.
   
Provider's description:
    - description of the distribution or service that you provide. If this is
    a software distribution, please include information such as what software
    is included, versions, general overview of installation, requirements,
    and so on.
   
Internet access:
    - where your service or distribution is available over the Internet;
    typically a WWW or FTP address.
   
Ordering:
    - how to order your distribution or service, if applicable. Include
    prices, shipping information, methods of payment, etc.
   
Support:
    - information on support terms and support contracts.
   
Last freeze date:
    - last freeze date of the current version(s). Also, your estimated update
    frequency.
   
Entry last modified:
    - date of submission of this entry.
   
Reviewer's comments:
    - independent reviewer's comments.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.3. Submission guidelines

Please keep your entry as short as possible. If you need to include extensive
information, please make a reference to where one can FTP or mail to get more
information on your distribution; these entries are only meant to be pointers
to where one can find information on your service or distribution.

If you provide more than one service or distribution, please use separate
entries for each.

We may edit your entries for conciseness and brevity if we find any
irrelevant information, or if the entry is overly verbose. Otherwise the
content should remain the same.

When making submissions to this document, you grant implicit permission for
the LDP to use the entries in other materials, such as printed books, or
further online documents. For example, information taken from this document
may be included in a published Linux book. If you do not want us to include
your entry in materials other than the current online document, please say
so.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Administrivia

6.1. Terms of use

This document is copyright 2001 by Martin S. Wheeler. You may use,
disseminate, and reproduce it freely, provided you:

  * do not omit or alter this copyright notice.
   
  * do not omit or alter the version number and date.
   
  * do not omit or alter the document's pointer to the current WWW version.
   
  * clearly mark any condensed, or altered versions as such.
   

These restrictions are intended to protect potential readers from stale or
mangled versions. If you think you have a good case for an exception, ask me.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.2. Acknowledgements

This document was originated by Bill Riemers. Matt Welsh maintained the
second version. Erik Troan then maintained the document to release 3.0.

In January 1995, Eric Raymond, while unaware of the existence of this
document, began to develop a similar FAQ in the format of his
not-quite-yet-discontinued PC-clone UNIX Software Buyer's Guide, which
covered mainly System V UNIXes and BSD/OS. (This Buyer's Guide should still
be available on Eric's site somewhere, if he has not yet turned it into a
useful HOWTO.)

In March 1995, Eric approached Erik about cooperating on a merged version. In
early April 1995, Erik went to work for Red Hat Software, and (wishing to
avoid a conflict of interest) handed the document to Eric. Eric merged in a
lot of new information and added several new fields to the distribution
entries, taking the document through releases 4, 5 and 6.

In January 2001, Martin Wheeler took over editorship of the document, which
with the enormous expansion in numbers of distributions available, had become
extremely time-consuming to maintain, and which Eric had decided to abandon.

Accordingly, this document is the result of serial collaboration. The
editorial `we' generally tags observations by all the maintainers; `I' is
Martin (the current editor/maintainer) speaking.

We are delighted to acknowledge the contributions of all the Linux users and
Internet hackers who have contributed information and feedback.

      Martin Wheeler
      Glastonbury
      January 2001
      
