LDAP Implementation HOWTO

Roel van Meer

[http://www.linvision.com] Linvision BV

r.vanmeer@linvision.com

Giuseppe Lo Biondo

[http://www.mi.infn.it] INFN MI

giuseppe.lobiondo@mi.infn.it

v0.5, 2001-03-30
Revision History                                                             
Revision 0.5           2001-03-30            Revised by: rvm                 
Cleanup, fixes, overview rewritten.                                          
Revision 0.4           2001-02-01            Revised by: rvm                 
Added dns section.                                                           
Revision 0.3           2001-01-18            Revised by: rvm                 
Added MTA sections.                                                          
Revision 0.2           2000-11-12            Revised by: glb                 
Improved section on nss. Added sections about certificates and wrappers.     


This document describes the technical aspects of storing application data in
an ldap server. It focuses on the configuration of various applications to
make them ldap-aware. Some applications that assist in handling ldap data are
also discussed.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table of Contents
1. Overview
    1.1. Why this howto?
    1.2. What is it about?
    1.3. What is it NOT about?
    1.4. Acknowledgements
    1.5. Disclaimer
    1.6. Copyright and license
   
   
2. LDAP authentication using pam_ldap and nss_ldap
    2.1. The components of the framework
        2.1.1. Authentication: PAM and pam_ldap.so
        2.1.2. The Name Service Switch and nss_ldap.so
        2.1.3. The Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
        2.1.4. The Name Service Caching Daemon
        2.1.5. The Secure Socket Layer
       
       
    2.2. Building the authentication system
        2.2.1. Server side
            2.2.1.1. Installing and configuring OpenLDAP
           
           
        2.2.2. Client side
            2.2.2.1. PAM LDAP Installation and Configuration
            2.2.2.2. NSS LDAP installation and configuration
            2.2.2.3. NSCD configuration
            2.2.2.4. LDAP client configuration file
           
           
       
       
    2.3. Starting up
    2.4. Accounts maintenance
    2.5. Known limits
    2.6. File permissions
   
   
3. Radius authentication using LDAP
    3.1. FreeRadius Radiusd configuration
    3.2. Testing Radius Authentication
    3.3. Sample CISCO IOS Configuration
   
   
4. Samba
5. DNS
    5.1. Using nss
        5.1.1. Configuration
        5.1.2. Schema
       
       
    5.2. Using bind
        5.2.1. Bind patch
        5.2.2. ldap2dns
        5.2.3. ispman
       
       
   
   
6. Mail Transfer Agents
    6.1. Sendmail
        6.1.1. Ldap support in sendmail
        6.1.2. System layout.
        6.1.3. Sendmail configuration file
        6.1.4. Schema
        6.1.5. More information.
       
       
    6.2. Postfix
        6.2.1. Support
        6.2.2. Configuration
        6.2.3. Example setup
       
       
    6.3. Qmail
   
   
7. Address books
8. Netscape roaming access
9. Publishing digital certificates with LDAP
    9.1. LDAP Server configuration
    9.2. Certificate Publishing
    9.3. LDAP Aware Clients
   
   
10. SSL/TLS and SSL/TLS wrappers for LDAP
    10.1. A Brief description of SSL
    10.2. SSL/TLS availability for OpenLDAP
    10.3. How to use stunnel to provide SSL/TLS to an LDAP V2 server
    10.4. How to use stunnel to provide SSL to LDAP clients
    10.5. How to use stunnel to provide SSL for slurpd replication
   
   
11. Ldap schema's
12. Example files
    12.1. The schema file
    12.2. Example base ldif
   
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Overview

1.1. Why this howto?

I started learning about ldap when my company felt the need for a centralized
storage of user account information, and wanted to use ldap for this. I soon
found that there were bits and pieces of documantation everywhere, but that
there was no document that put it all together. This has been the reason to
start it.

Furthermore, Ldap is becoming more widely used every day. I think it is
useful that when people are considering to use Ldap, they can get a full
overview of which applications are Ldap aware. This might help them to choose
their system setup carefully, without throwing everything about every time
they want to change something or add functionality.

It started out as a project roadmap on how we wanted to implement Ldap for
our own uses. But thanks to my employer, [http://www.linvision.com]
Linvision, who gave me the opportunity to do some research on things that
weren't really useful to our own cause, it changed from a roadmap to a
technical overview of applications that are ldap aware.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.2. What is it about?

Most of the common services can be authenticated through PAM, Pluggable
Authentication Modules. With the pam_ldap and nss_ldap modules, all pamified
programs can get their information from LDAP. More information about PAM in
general can be found on [http://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/libs/pam/] the
Linux-PAM site. Information about pam_ldap and nss_ldap can be found on the
[http://www.padl.com] padl software site.

For Samba, things are a little difficult at this moment. The current stable
Samba versions do not have Ldap support. Ldap support can be found in the
HEAD and TNG branch, and probably also in the combined tree. The problem is
that samba has it's own usernames and passwords. It does have usage for PAM,
in fact, but that is not sufficient to do all the authentication and
retrieval of user information. Because the implementation of LDAP in samba is
not fully finished yet, there are a few limitations to the use of ldap with
samba. From my experiences, the HEAD is at this time (early June 2000) not
stable enough, and the performance is unsatisfying. However, when the ldap
support is fully functional in the new releases, samba too can be configured
to get all of it's user information from ldap.

Another thing that can be stored into an ldap database is DNS. When the
amount of machines connected to your network increases, it is no longer
feasable to edit the DNS files by hand. When machine accounts are stored into
ldap, two simple DNS entries (one for the lookup, and one for the reverse
lookup) can easily be added at the same time. This too provides a
simplification of system management. Although the storage of DNS entries in
an ldap database may not be neccesary for most systems, it may prove useful
to some people.

Since sendmail version 8.9 (see [http://www.sendmail.net/] sendmail.net for
more details), sendmail has Ldap support. Postfix and QMail are ldap-aware
too. When setting up an email system which has multiple mailhosts and or
fallback hosts, it is convenient to store all the information in one place.
Normally, every system needs to be configured separately, with the same
information. When using ldap, this can be avoided.

Roaming access can also be used with LDAP. Netscape versions 4.5 and up have
the possibility to store user data like bookmarks and such via an HTML or
LDAP server. This gives users their good old preferences, wherever they log
in and use Netscape.

Microsoft's office programs can import address books. Thay can also use an
Active Directory service to automagically match emailaddresses to user names
or nicknames. With Ldap this can be done on a Linux system, without the need
for Microsoft Exchange Server or something the like.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.3. What is it NOT about?

First thing: I will try not to talk too much about the actual setup and
administration of Ldap itself. There is an excellent Ldap HOWTO available at
the Linux Documentation Project that discusses this.

Secondly, I will not discuss things regarding the applications itself, when
they have nothing to do with Ldap.

Lastly, in most cases, I cannot tell you if it is wise to use Ldap. I don't
have that kind of experience. I can tell you how to do it, if you want, but i
cannot tell you if you should. There is plenty documentaion available that
discusses the useability of Ldap in general.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.4. Acknowledgements

At first, I would like to thank my employer, [http://www.linvision.com]
Linvision, for giving me the opportunity to work on this document in their
time.

Furthermore, I would like to thank the following people, who have contributed
to this document in some way (in no particular order): Giuseppe Lo Biondo.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.5. Disclaimer

This document is provided as is and should be considered as a work in
progress. Several sections are as yet unfinished, and probably a lot of
things that should be in here, aren't. I would greatly appreciate any
comments on this document, of whatever nature they may be.

In any case, think before you go messing around with your system and don't
come to me if it breaks.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.6. Copyright and license

Copyright (c) by Roel van Meer, Giuseppe Lo Biondo. This document may be
distributed only subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the LDP
License at the [http://www.linuxdoc.org/COPYRIGHT.html] Linux Documentation
Project.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. LDAP authentication using pam_ldap and nss_ldap

This section focuses on how to use LDAP as a NIS substitute for user accounts
management. Having a lot of user accounts on several hosts often causes
misalignments in the accounts configuration. LDAP can be used to build a
centralized authentication system thus avoiding data replication and
increasing data consistency.

At the moment the most used method to distribute users account data and other
information through a network is the Network Information Service (NIS). Like
LDAP, NIS is a distributed service that allows to have a central server where
configuration files such as passwd, shadow, groups, services, hosts etc. are
kept. The NIS server is queried by NIS clients to retrieve this information.

LDAP can offer the same functionality of NIS, moreover there are several
advantages on using LDAP:

  * Information on the LDAP server can be easily used for several purposes.
    As outlined in this HOWTO, the same users entries on the LDAP database
    can be used for other applications like phone directories, mail routing,
    staff databases etc., thus avoiding data replication and inconsistency.
   
  * LDAP allows complex access control lists to be applied on the database.
    This allows for a fine grain tuning of permissions on the database
    entries.
   
  * A secure transmission channel between the LDAP server and the clients can
    be implemented through the Secure Socket Layer (SSL).
   
  * A fault tolerant service can be implemented using slapd replication [1]
    and DNS round robin queries (this is not covered in this document).
   
  * Having a single instance of users on the network helps to maintain users
    on many hosts from a single management point (i.e. you can create and
    delete accounts in the LDAP server and this changes are available
    immediately to LDAP clients).
   

Herein I'll focus on how an LDAP server can be used for authentication and
authorization on systems providing the Pluggable Authentication Module (PAM)
and the Name Service Switch (NSS) technologies, in particular I'll refer to
the Linux operating system even if this instructions can be applied to other
operating systems.

The environment proposed consists of an LDAP server where users account data
is stored in a convenient format and a set of Un*x clients using this
information to authenticate and authorize users on resources in a standard Un
*x fashion.

A secure channel is also required in client/server communications since
critical information such as user account data, should not be sent in clear
over the network, this channel will be provided by the Secure Socket Layer.

On the client side a caching mechanism, needed for performance issues, can be
provided by the Name Service Caching Daemon.

All (almost) the software used to build this system is Open Source.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1. The components of the framework

This section outlines the various components that are used to build the
authentication system. For each component is given a brief description.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.1. Authentication: PAM and pam_ldap.so

The Pluggable Authentication Module allows integration of various
authentication technologies such as standard UNIX, RSA, DCE, LDAP etc. into
system services such as login, passwd, rlogin, su, ftp, ssh etc. without
changing any of these services.

First implemented by Sun Solaris, PAM is now the standard authentication
framework of many Linux distributions, including RedHat and Debian. It
provides an API through which authentication requests are mapped into
technology specific actions (implemented in the so called pam modules). This
mapping is done by PAM configuration files, in which, for each service are
basically given the authentication mechanisms to use.

In our case, the pam_ldap module, implemented in the shared library
pam_ldap.so, allows user and group authentication using an LDAP service.

Each service that needs an authentication facility, can be configured through
the PAM configuration files to use different authentication methods. This
means that it is possible, using the PAM configuration files, to write a
custom list of requirements that an user must satisfy to obtain access to a
resource.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.2. The Name Service Switch and nss_ldap.so

Once an user is authenticated, many applications still need access to user
information. This information is traditionally contained in text files (/etc/
passwd, /etc/shadow, and /etc/group) but can also be provided by other name
services.

As a new name service (such as LDAP) is introduced it can be implemented
either in the C library (as it was for NIS and DNS) or in the application
that wants to use the new nameservice.

Anyway, this can be avoided using a common, general purpose, name service API
and by demanding to a set of libraries the task of retrieving this
information performing technology based operations.

This solution was adopted in the GNU C Library that implements the Name
Service Switch, a method originated from the Sun C library that permits to
obtain information from various name services through a common API.

NSS uses a common API and a configuration file (/etc/nsswitch.conf) in which
the name service providers for every supported database are specified.

The databases currently supported by NSS [2] are:

  * aliases: Mail aliases.
   
  * ethers: Ethernet numbers.
   
  * group: Groups of users.
   
  * hosts: Host names and numbers.
   
  * netgroup: Network wide list of host and users.
   
  * network: Network names and numbers.
   
  * protocols: Network protocols.
   
  * passwd: User passwords.
   
  * rpc: Remote procedure call names and numbers.
   
  * services: Network services.
   
  * shadow: Shadow user passwords.
   

Using the nss_ldap shared library it is possible to implement the maps above
using LDAP, anyway here I'll focus only on the LDAP implementation of shadow,
passwd and group database tough all the maps above can be implemented. For
most of the other maps it is even unadvisable to store them in ldap, as they
tend not to change too often, so it is not a problem to have them locally as
files, and storing them in ldap would cause some minor performance loss.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.3. The Lightweight Directory Access Protocol

For our application LDAP is used to provide clients with information about
user accounts and user groups. The standard objectclasses that are used to
represent users and groups are: top, posixAccount, shadowAccount and
posixGroup.

Users entries on the database must belong at least[3] to the top,
posixAccount and shadowAccount objectclasses. Group entries must belong to
the top and posixGroup objectclasses.

The implementation of pam_ldap and nss_ldap that we use refers to this
objectclasses, that are described in RFC 2307.

   
    Note: Actually LDAP NSS recognize other objectclasses
   
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.1.4. The Name Service Caching Daemon

The Name Service Caching Daemon (NSCD) is used to cache name service lookups
and can improve performance with the services provided by the NSS.

It must be tuned with a large cache for passwd entries in order to have
acceptable performance on the client side.

It has some disadvantages however, like the introduction of cache
inconsistencies, so you would want to be sure you need this before you use
it. We have succesfully running some systems without it, and personally i
think that it isn't really neccesary on relatively small systems.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.5. The Secure Socket Layer

For details on SSL refer to Section 10.

SSL is needed in the communication between the LDAP server and the clients
libraries (pam_ldap.so and nss_ldap.so), since sensible data, such as
password entries, needs to be encrypted between the client and the server.
SLL also permits the client to uniquely identify the server, thus avoiding to
obtain authentication informations from an untrusted source.

Client authentication (the server identifies the client) is not supported in
the current implementation of pam_ldap and nss_ldap modules tough it may be
useful.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2. Building the authentication system

This section describes the steps needed to build the authentication system
using the components described in the previous section.


Figure 1. PAM Layout

The relationships among the pieces of the authentication system from the PAM
point of view


Figure 2. NSS Layout

The relationships among the pieces of the authentication system from the NSS
perspective

Though this layout may seem quite complex to implement, most of the
components are already in place in a Linux system.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1. Server side

On the server side an LDAP server must be installed and configured. The LDAP
server used is OpenLDAP, an open source LDAP toolkit including an LDAP server
(slapd), library and utilities.

At the moment OpenLDAP comes with two implementation of LDAP: a V2
implementation (OpenLDAP 1.2.x) ad a V3 (OpenLDAP 2.0.x) implementation

The V3 implementation provides native SSL, the V2 doesn't. Anyway it is
possible to use an SSL wrapper to add SSL capabilities to the server (see 
Section 10).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1.1. Installing and configuring OpenLDAP

You can refer to the LDAP-HOWTO for instruction on installation and
configuration of LDAP

Once slapd is properly configured we need to insert some data for the initial
creation of the database. Therefore an LDIF (LDAP Data interchange format)
file must be created. This is a text file that can be imported in the LDAP
database with the command:

#ldif2ldbm -i your_file.ldif                                                 

   
    Note: ldif2ldbm is provided with the OpenLDAP 1.2.x package, if you use
    OpenLDAP 2.0.x, you should use the ldapadd command (after the server is
    started).
   
If you use OpenLDAP 2.0.x (LDAPv3) you can find the standard nis schema in
the file etc/openldap/schema/nis.schema, include it in your slapd.conf with
the include directive, to have schema enforcement.

Here is an example of a minimal LDIF file. Each entry is separated by a blank
line.

dn:dc=yourorg, dc=com                                                        
objectclass: top                                                             
objectclass: organizationalUnit                                              
                                                                             
dn:ou=groups, dc=yourorg, dc=com                                             
objectclass: top                                                             
objectclass: organizationalUnit                                              
ou: groups                                                                   
                                                                             
dn:ou=people, dc=yourorg, dc=com                                             
objectclass: top                                                             
objectclass: organizationalUnit                                              
ou: people                                                                   
                                                                             
dn: cn=Giuseppe LoBiondo, ou=people, dc=yourorg, dc=com                      
cn: Giuseppe Lo Biondo                                                       
sn: Lo Biondo                                                                
objectclass: top                                                             
objectclass: person                                                          
objectclass: posixAccount                                                    
objectclass: shadowAccount                                                   
uid:giuseppe                                                                 
userpassword:{crypt}$1$ss2ii(0$gbs*do&@=)eksd                                
uidnumber:104                                                                
gidnumber:100                                                                
gecos:Giuseppe Lo Biondo                                                     
loginShell:/bin/zsh                                                          
homeDirectory: /home/giuseppe                                                
shadowLastChange:10877                                                       
shadowMin: 0                                                                 
shadowMax: 999999                                                            
shadowWarning: 7                                                             
shadowInactive: -1                                                           
shadowExpire: -1                                                             
shadowFlag: 0                                                                
                                                                             
dn: cn=mygroup, ou=groups, dc=yourorg, dc=com                                
objectclass: top                                                             
objectclass: posixGroup                                                      
cn: mygroup                                                                  
gidnumber: 100                                                               
memberuid: giuseppe                                                          
memberuid: anotheruser                                                       

   
    Note: Note that lines that are too long are continued on the following
    line started by a tab or a space, this in true too for LDIF format files
   
Here we defined the base DN for the orgazation dc=yourorg, dc=com under which
are contained two sub organizational units: people and groups. Then is
described a user that belongs to the people organizational unit and a group
(which the users belongs to) under the groups organizational unit.

   
    Note: Useful tools to convert existing databases into ldif format are
    provided by PADL and can be found at the address [ftp://ftp.padl.com/pub/
    MigrationTools.tar.gz] ftp://ftp.padl.com/pub/MigrationTools.tar.gz.
   
The LDIF file must be imported in the server while it is not running since
the ldif2ldbm command builds the database directly, bypassing the LDAP
server. Once the LDIF file is imported into the database, the server can be
started.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2. Client side

On the client side pam_ldap.so and nss_ldap.so are required and they must be
compiled using the Netscape LDAP Library (Mozilla) since it provides the
required LDAPS (LDAP over SSL) API. The library is distributed in a binary
package under Netscape One license and is not open source (it is public
domain anyway).

The package can be extracted, for example, in the directory /usr/local/
ldapsdk.

Client libraries must also have access to a certificate database containing
the LDAP (stunnel) server certificate and the CA certificate of the CA that
signed the server certificate (marked as trusted).

The certificate database must be in Netscape format since the Mozilla LDAP
API used to compile pam_ldap and nss_ldap uses certificate databases in
Netscape format.

To deal with such certificate databases it is convenient to use the certutil
utility found in the PKCS#11 package provided by Netscape [4].

The main configuration file for LDAP clients is /etc/ldap.conf.

Note that if you use nss_ldap, you don't strictly need to use pam_ldap.

You can use the pam_unix_auth module instead, since nss_ldap maps all getpw*
and getsh* calls into LDAP lookups and pam_unix_auth uses this calls to
authenticate users.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.1. PAM LDAP Installation and Configuration

To compile and install pam_ldap, do the following:

$ ./configure --with-ldap-lib=netscape4 \                                    
              --with-ldap-dir=/usr/local/ldapsdk                             
$ make                                                                       
# make install                                                               

The configure switch --with-ldap-lib tells which LDAP library you are going
to use.

The switch --with-ldap-dir tells where you have installed your Netscape
ldapsdk toolkit.

This will install /lib/security/pam_ldap.so.1 and the various symlinks.

PAM has to be properly configured in order to access the new authentication
system. PAM configuration files are located in the directory /etc/pam.d and
are named after the service for which authentication is provided.

For example this is the PAM configuration file for the login service (in a
file named login).

                                                                               
#%PAM-1.0                                                                      
auth     required   /lib/security/pam_securetty.so                             
auth     required   /lib/security/pam_nologin.so                               
auth     sufficient /lib/security/pam_ldap.so                                  
auth     required   /lib/security/pam_unix_auth.so use_first_pass              
account  sufficient /lib/security/pam_ldap.so                                  
account  required   /lib/security/pam_unix_acct.so                             
password required   /lib/security/pam_cracklib.so                              
password sufficient /lib/security/pam_ldap.so                                  
password required   /lib/security/pam_unix_passwd.so use_first_pass md5 shadow 
session  required   /lib/security/pam_unix_session.so                          

Standard PAM configuration files for use with PAM can be found in the
pam_ldap source distribution, in the directory pam_ldap-version/pam.d.

This files can be copied in the /etc/pam.d directory. Caution must be given
when performing this operation, since if something goes wrong you probably
will not be able to login again. It is suggested to make a backup copy of /
etc/pam.d before installing new files there and to leave an open privileged
shell.

   
    Note: In the example pam.d directory, a sshd file is not present, so
    unless you create one, you will be unable to login via ssh, if it uses
    pam (OpenSSH does use PAM).
   
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.2.2.2. NSS LDAP installation and configuration

After you've unpacked the sources, check the makefile. For most
configurations, it doesn't need to be edited. Anyway, if you want to use SSL
you must link against an SSL aware LDAP library, such as the Netscape one.

Assuming that the ldap sdk is in /usr/local/ldapsdk you have to modify the
Makefile to enable SSL. Look for NSFLAGS in Makefile.linux.mozilla and
uncomment -DSSL.

Also check the LIBS definition to see if the ldapssl library specified in the
file is the same that you have installed (ldap_nss.so compiles with both
libldapssl40 and libldapssl30).

Then you can install the library:

$ make -f Makefile.linux.mozilla                                             
# make -f Makefile.linux.mozilla install                                     
#ldconfig                                                                    

this installs /lib/libnss_ldap.so, which is the nss_ldap library, and a set
of example configuration files, /etc/nsswitch.ldap and /etc/ldap.conf, in
case they do not exist already.

Once you have installed it you must edit the NSS configuration file /etc/
nsswitch.conf. Tough LDAP can be used for all the services we use it only for
passwd, group and shadow therefore we should have something like:

                                                                             
passwd: files ldap                                                           
group:  files ldap                                                           
shadow: files ldap                                                           

in the first lines of the configuration file. With this configuration,
entries are first looked in the system files and, if no value is returned,
the LDAP server is queried.

   
    Note: Beware when using ldap as backup for your dns lookups. If dns
    cannot resolve the hostname, we're in infinite recursion, because libldap
    calls gethostbyname(). [ from the nsswitch.ldap]
   
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.2.2.3. NSCD configuration

NSCD is already available in many Linux distributions, anyway it can be found
within the GNU C library package.

The NSCD configuration file is /etc/nscd.conf. Each line specifies either an
attribute and a value, or an attribute, cachename, and a value. Fields are
separated either by SPACE or TAB characters. cachename can be hosts, passwd,
or groups (in our case we won't cache hosts).

enable-cache           passwd  yes                                           
positive-time-to-live  passwd  600                                           
negative-time-to-live  passwd  20                                            
suggested-size         passwd  211                                           
keep-hot-count         passwd  20                                            
check-files            passwd  yes                                           
enable-cache           group  yes                                            
positive-time-to-live  group  3600                                           
negative-time-to-live  group  60                                             
suggested-size         group  211                                            
keep-hot-count         group  20                                             
check-files            group  yes                                            

Keep in mind that the nscd program caches passwd entries obtained from LDAP.

This means that when an user is modified on the ldap server, the nscd cache
remains valid. This is avoided when using flat unix files by the check-files
directive that invalidates the cache when the corresponding file is modified.
Such a mechanism should be generalized, at the moment anyway does not apply
to LDAP. A way to avoid possible misalignments between the LDAP server and
the cache is to invalidate the cache manually when updating passwd entries
with the command:

#nscd --invalidate=TABLE                                                     

Where TABLE can be passwd, groups or hosts.

To avoid confusion when testing, do not use nscd.

Moreover using nss and nscd will produce a lot of open filedescriptors, so is
easy to run out of available filedescriptors on the system (this can hang
your system).

You can increase the maximum number of filedescriptors in a Linux box (Kernel
2.2.x) with something like:

#echo 16384 > /proc/sys/fs/file-max                                          

The maximum number of filedescriptors suggested for a system depends anyway
from the configuration of your system.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.4. LDAP client configuration file

The LDAP client configuration file /etc/ldap.conf is read by pam_ldap and
nss_ldap as well as other LDAP clients. The following is an example of how it
should look like in our environment.

#                                                                            
# $Id: section-pamnss.sgml,v 1.2 2001/03/26 16:57:07 rolek Exp $             
# This is the configuration file for the LDAP nameservice                    
# switch library and the LDAP PAM module.                                    
# PADL Software                                                              
# http://www.padl.com                                                        
#                                                                            
# If the host and base aren't here, then the DNS RR                          
# _ldap._tcp.[defaultdomain]. will be resolved. [defaultdomain]              
# will be mapped to a distinguished name and the target host                 
# will be used as the server.                                                
#                                                                            
# Your LDAP server. Must be resolvable without using LDAP.                   
host 192.111.111.111                                                         
#                                                                            
# The distinguished name of the search base.                                 
base dc=yourorg, dc=com                                                      
#                                                                            
# The LDAP version to use (defaults to 2,                                    
# use 3 if you are using OpenLDAP 2.0.x or Netscape Directory Server)        
# ldap_version 3                                                             
#                                                                            
# The distinguished name to bind to the server with.                         
# Optional: default is to bind anonymously.                                  
# binddn cn=manager,dc=padl,dc=com                                           
#                                                                            
# The credentials to bind with.                                              
# Optional: default is no credential.                                        
#bindpw secret                                                               
#                                                                            
# The port.                                                                  
# Optional: default is 389. 636 is for ldaps                                 
port 636                                                                     
#                                                                            
# The search scope.                                                          
#scope sub                                                                   
#scope one                                                                   
#scope base                                                                  
#                                                                            
# The following options are specific to nss_ldap.                            
#                                                                            
# The hashing algorithm your libc uses.                                      
# Optional: default is des                                                   
#crypt md5                                                                   
#crypt sha                                                                   
#crypt des                                                                   
#                                                                            
# The following options are specific to pam_ldap.                            
#                                                                            
# Filter to AND with uid=%s                                                  
pam_filter objectclass=posixAccount                                          
#                                                                            
# The user ID attribute (defaults to uid)                                    
pam_login_attribute uid                                                      
#                                                                            
# Search the root DSE for the password policy (works                         
# with Netscape Directory Server)                                            
#pam_lookup_policy yes                                                       
#                                                                            
# Group to enforce membership of                                             
#                                                                            
#pam_groupdn cn=PAM,ou=Groups,dc=padl,dc=com                                 
#                                                                            
# Group member attribute                                                     
pam_member_attribute memberuid                                               
# Template login attribute, default template user                            
# (can be overridden by value of former attribute                            
# in user's entry)                                                           
#pam_login_attribute userPrincipalName                                       
#pam_template_login_attribute uid                                            
#pam_template_login nobody                                                   
#                                                                            
# Hash password locally; required for University of                          
# Michigan LDAP server, and works with Netscape                              
# Directory Server if you're using the UNIX-Crypt                            
# hash mechanism and not using the NT Synchronization                        
# service.                                                                   
pam_crypt local                                                              
#                                                                            
# SSL Configuration                                                          
ssl yes                                                                      
sslpath /usr/local/ssl/certs                                                 
#                                                                            

   
    Note: To avoid problems with the various applications that may read this
    file it is suggested not to use tabs between parameters and values, only
    a single space.
   
The pam_groupdn directive is useful when an LDAP server provides
authentication information to a pool of clients, but the user should be
authorized only on a set of clients. This directive can provide the same
functionality of NIS netgroups.

The SSL configuration directives are not documented in the package, but they
tell to enable SSL and where the file containing the LDAP server certificate
and the CA certificate is stored.

A Netscape certificate database named cert7.db is searched in sslpath. This
file must contain the server certificate and the CA certificate (unless the
server certificate is self signed). There are two ways to generate this file:
using the Netscape PKCS#11 tools or using the Netscape browser.

With the Netscape browser, after you have started slapd and stunnel on the
server you can use Netscape Navigator to connect to the URL https://
your.ldap.server:636/, you will be prompted to insert the server certificate
in your database. Also the CA certificate (provided by your CA) must be
loaded in the database (unless you are using a self signed certificate). At
this point you can copy the $HOME/.netscape/cert7.db in sslpath. It is
preferred that you use a scratch account with a default cert7.db file since
other server certificates, that may be present in your personal certificate
database, will be considered by your LDAP client as trusted authentication
servers. Once the browser has imported the server certificate it can be used
to debug SSL since it will behave like the pam and nss libraries.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3. Starting up

On the server side you have to start slapd (the LDAP daemon process) with a
command like:

# slapd                                                                      

If you use stunnel, it has to be started on the LDAPS port 636:

                                                                             
# /usr/local/sbin/stunnel  -r ldap  -d 636 \                                 
 -p /usr/local/ssl/certs/stunnel.pem                                         

If you use OpenLDAP 2.0.x, compiled with TLS (OpenSSL), you can start the
server using the command

                                                                             
# slapd -h "ldap:/// ldaps:///"                                              

On the client nscd can be started with the a startup script, usually found in
many Linux distributions:

                                                                             
# /etc/rc.d/init.d/nscd start                                                

If PAM and NSS are correctly configured this should be enough.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4. Accounts maintenance

At this point account creation and maintenance should be done using LDAP
client tools.

Unfortunately these general purpose tools are not intended for Un*x accounts
maintenance. The one that seems to be enough versatile is the LDAP Browser/
Editor ([http://www-unix.mcs.anl.gov/~gawor/ldap] http://www-unix.mcs.anl.gov
/~gawor/ldap) that allows to set passwords in various formats and can use SSL
to connect to the server.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5. Known limits

As it is for NIS with a single master server (no slave servers), LDAP without
a replication mechanism represents a single point of failure for the
authentication system. For authentication purposes it is rather important to
implement LDAP replication. The server that cames with OpenLDAP (slapd)
provides replication capabilities.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6. File permissions

The following are the file permissions that should be applied to some of the
files used by the authentication system.

                                                                             
-rw-r--r--  root.root /etc/ldap.conf                                         
-rw-------  root.root /usr/local/etc/openldap/slapd.conf                     
-rwxr-xr-x  root.root /lib/security/pam_ldap.so.1                            
-rw-r--r--  root.root /lib/libnss_ldap-2.1.2.so                              
-rw-r--r--  root.root /usr/local/ssl/certs/cert7.db                          
-rw-------  root.root /usr/local/ssl/certs/stunnel.pem                       
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Radius authentication using LDAP

A Radius Server, is a daemon for un*x operating systems which allows one to
set up (guess what!) a radius protocol server, which is usually used for
authentication and accounting of dial-up users. To use server, you also need
a correctly setup client which will talk to it, usually a terminal server or
a PC with appropriate which emulates it (PortSlave, radiusclient etc). [From
the freeradius FAQ]

Radius has its own database of users, anyway, since this information is
already contained in LDAP, it will be more convenient to use it!

There are several freeware Radius servers, the one that has good support for
LDAP is the FreeRadius server ([http://www.freeradius.org] http://
www.freeradius.org), it is still a development version, anyway the LDAP
module works fine.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1. FreeRadius Radiusd configuration

Once you have installed the server you have to configure it using the
configuration files, that are located under /etc/raddb (or /usr/local/etc/
raddb)

In the radiusd.conf file edit :

[...omissis]                                                                 
# Uncomment this if you want to use ldap (Auth-Type = LDAP)                  
# Also uncomment it in the authenticate{} block below                        
        ldap {                                                               
                server   = ldap.yourorg.com                                  
                #login    = "cn=admin,o=My Org,c=US"                         
                #password = mypass                                           
                basedn   = "ou=users,dc=yourorg,dc=com"                      
                filter   = "(posixAccount)(uid=%u))"                         
        }                                                                    
                                                                             
[...omissis]                                                                 
                                                                             
# Authentication types, Auth-Type = System and PAM for now.                  
authenticate {                                                               
        pam                                                                  
        unix                                                                 
#       sql                                                                  
#       sql2                                                                 
# Uncomment this if you want to use ldap (Auth-Type = LDAP)                  
        ldap                                                                 
}                                                                            
[...omissis]                                                                 

Also edit the dictionary file:

[...omissis]                                                                 
#                                                                            
#       Non-Protocol Integer Translations                                    
#                                                                            
                                                                             
VALUE           Auth-Type               Local                   0            
VALUE           Auth-Type               System                  1            
VALUE           Auth-Type               SecurID                 2            
VALUE           Auth-Type               Crypt-Local             3            
VALUE           Auth-Type               Reject                  4            
VALUE           Auth-Type               ActivCard               4            
VALUE           Auth-Type               LDAP                    5            
[...omissis]                                                                 

And the users file to have a default authorization entry:

[...omissis]                                                                 
DEFAULT         Auth-Type := LDAP                                            
                Fall-Through = 1                                             
[...omissis]                                                                 

If you alreay set up an LDAP server for Un*x accounts management, this is
enough.

On the LDAP server ensure also that the radius server can read the all the
posixAccount attributes (expecially uid and userpassword).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2. Testing Radius Authentication

To test everything server start radiusd in debugging mode:

/usr/local/sbin/radiusd  -X -A                                               

Then use the radtest program whith a syntax like

radtest username "password" radius.yourorg.com 1 testing123                  

If everything went fine you should receive an Acces-Accept packet from the
Radius server.

You can also use stunnel in client mode to provide SSL in the connection
between the Radius server and the LDAPS server. For details on SSL refer to 
Section 10.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3. Sample CISCO IOS Configuration

Just for completeness, here is a sample Cisco IOS configuration. Anyway, this
is outside the purpose of the HOWTO so it may not suit your needs.

[...omissis]                                                                 
aaa new-model                                                                
aaa authentication login default radius enable                               
aaa authentication ppp default radius                                        
aaa authorization network radius                                             
[...omissis]                                                                 
radius-server host 192.168.10.1                                              
radius-server timeout 10                                                     
radius-server key cisco                                                      
[...omissis]                                                                 

   
    Note: Almost all NAS use port 1645 for radius, check it out and configure
    the server appropriately.
   
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Samba

The current stable samba tree does not contain ldap support. The HEAD and TNG
branches should, but are still under heavy development. When stable version
are released I will document the implementation of samba in it here. Until
then, you might want to take a look a [http://www.unav.es/cti/ldap-smb/
ldap-smb-HEAD-howto.html] document written by Ignacio Coupeau, where he
describes the setup of Ldap for both of these branches.

Anyway, at this point, the smbpasswd file still has to be used. User account
information is already retrieved from ldap, though. (As this is done by
nsswitch, not samba.) When samba supports ldap, it should be possible to
store the information that is now contained in the smbpasswd and optionally
smbusers files in ldap. Whether it is possible for shares to be dynamically
defined in ldap, I don't know, but I suppose it is not.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. DNS

There are to ways of dns that can be configured via ldap, client side and
server side. The first, client side, is using the name server switch to
access the dns entries in the Ldap database. This means that only clients
that modify their /etc/nsswitch.conf file will see the dns entries from ldap.
The second way to do it is to use ldap as a backend for bind or tinydns.
There are some projects going on about this subject and i will describe them
below.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.1. Using nss

When using nss to access (additional) host entries, please take not that only
"friendly" machines (e.g. machines that you know of and whoes configuration
you can control) can use this service. It might be useful for intranet host
lookups that change often, but it cannot be used to distribute your
webservers virtual hostnames to the world. Note that also the nslookup
command bypasses both /etc/hosts and ldap, so it cannot be used to check if
your setup is working. Use something like host or ping instead, which does a
lookup with the internel gehostbyname() function.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.1.1. Configuration

To have the name server switch use ldap for dns lookups it must be configured
with nss_ldap. How to set up nss_ldap, you can find in Section 2. Here i will
assume you have a working nss_ldap configuration. The dns lookups of nss are
controlled with the hosts line in /etc/nsswitch.conf. It is very unlikely
that you do not already have a hosts line. Most probably it will contain the 
files and dns entries. You should add ldap to it like this:

hosts:          files, dns, ldap                                             

Think well about the order in which you specify these! It is advised always
to put files as the first entry. Then, if you want ldap to override your
local dns server, you have to make sure that the ip of the ldap server can be
found in the /etc/hosts file. If not, you will have a nice recursive lookup
going. -- You want to look up a host, it's not in files, so we try to contact
the ldap server, whoes ip we don't know, so we try to look it up in files,
where we cannot find it, so we try to contact the ldap server -- get the
point? You could bypass this problem entirely by referring to your ldap
server with an ip number instead of a hostname (in /etc/ldap.conf, that is.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.1.2. Schema

The schema used for this, and similar services, can be found in [http://
www.cis.ohio-state.edu/cgi-bin/rfc/rfc2307.html] RFC 2307. Entries used for
mapping names to ipnumbers are in an objectclass ipHost. The name part of the
mapping is given in the attribute cn, while the ip part lives in ipHostNumber
. A typical ldif entry would therefore look like this:

dn: cn=somehostname.mydomain.com,ou=Network,o=YourOrg,c=NL                   
objectclass: top                                                             
objectclass: ipHost                                                          
cn: somehostname.internal.example.com                                        
ipHostNumber: 10.1.5.13                                                      

Of course, the usual restrictions and possibilities that come with dns apply.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2. Using bind

There are a few possibilities with bind or tinydns nowadays, but imho none of
them is a "real" solution (yet). I must say, however, that i have no
experience with any of them. They are listed below.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2.1. Bind patch

David Storey is working on a patch for Bind, which makes it get its data
directly from ldap. This means that every time a request is performed on the
bind daemon, it does a lookup in ldap. At this time, his future plans were:
(Taken from the source) to have at least two modes of operation: cached and
dynamic. Cached mode operates just like an rbtdb by loading the entire zone
into memory and reloading whenever the server is HUP'ed. Dynamic mode is much
like it is now: every request means an LDAP lookup. For up to date
information you should check out the [ftp://ftp.eyeo.com/bind/] sources.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2.2. ldap2dns

Taken entirely from their website:

ldap2dns is a program to create DNS records directly from a LDAP directory.
It can and should be be used to replace the secondary name-server by a second
primary one. ldap2dns helps to reduce all kind of administration overhead. No
more flat file editing, no more zone file editing. After having installed
ldap2dns, the administrator only has to access the LDAP directory. If he
desires he can add access control for each zone, create a webbased GUI and
add all other kind of zone and resource record information without
interfering with the DNS server. ldap2dns is designed to write binary
data.cdb files used by tinydns, but also may be used to write .db-files used
by named.

The projects homepage is [http://ldap2dns.tiscover.com/] here.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2.3. ispman

ispman is a perl-based isp management package. It uses an ldap database
backend for it's configuration. It can do lot's of things, so you might check
out what you need exactly. It's at [http://www.ispman.org] ispman.org.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Mail Transfer Agents

i will describe three different MTA's in this section, Sendmail, Postfix and
Qmail. These are three MTA's that can be configured to use Ldap for the
retrieval of information. From personal experience, I must say that Postfix
is much easier to set up than sendmail, but this may change in the future, as
the ldap support in sendmail develops to a more mature state. I have not used
qmail myself.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.1. Sendmail

6.1.1. Ldap support in sendmail

Sendmail has support for ldap since somewhere around version 8.8.x using the
map type ldapx.From version 8.10 and up an ldap database type ldap is
supported. Please note that the ldap map support is not enabled per default
in the RedHat package. Debian versions 2.2 and later do have ldap support in
their sendmail, I am told. If you have to compile it yourself, please read
the file sendmail/README from the sendmail sources. It contains valuable
information about how to compile in the ldap support.

Both the old and the new ldap map type have the ability to look up entries in
an ldap database. There is one thing that must be noted however. When a
search is being done, only one result should be returned. If more results are
found, only the first is used. Additionally, is multiple return values for
that result are found, only the first is returned. Let's take a look at the
following example ldif file:

dn: cn=mailuser1,ou=mail,dc=company,dc=com                                   
objectclass: top                                                             
objectclass: foo                                                             
cn: mailuser1                                                                
mail: mailuser1@company.com                                                  
mail: info@company.com                                                       

If a search is performed with a simple search filter like cn=mailuser1, and
the attribute that is asked for is mail, only mailuser1@company.com, is
returned. To get both results, they should we stored in a single-valued
attribute with comma-separated values, like this:

mail: mailuser1@company.com, info@company.com                                

An email message containing information related to this subject can be found
at the [alias_issues] LIH home.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.1.2. System layout.

When ldap maps are available, almost anything can be looked up in an ldap
database. What we would like to do is to simplify the configuration of the
following setup.

Let's say we have a medium-sized or large network where we recieve for many
domains. We have two mailhosts and two or three fallback hosts. This setup
will normally have four places where three types of information are stored.

  * The mailhosts both need a file , or traditionally sendmail.cw, to store
    the domains for which they should recieve mail. The fallback hosts keep
    the same information in the access file, but they use it to list the
    domains for which they should relay any incoming mail.
   
  * The mailhosts both have a virtusers file, which maps multiple adresses
    (or entire domains) to a single virtual or local user.
   
  * The mailhosts both have an aliases file, which maps virtual users to one
    or more mail addresses or local users.
   

If this information is stored in a single database, each host will read its
configuration from that database, which improves both the manageability and
the scaleability of the network. One could even think of a single host which
carries all data, mapped to with nfs. In such a case it makes no difference
anymore to which host we are connecting. To a user, they appear to be all the
same.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.1.3. Sendmail configuration file

To understand how this information is read from an ldap database instead of
the regular files a little background knowledge of the sendmail.cf file is
neccesary. The information we're dealing with here is stored in two different
ways. The local-host-names file is read into a class (class w, to be exactly,
hence the old extension cw), while the virtusers file is used through a
simple map. The aliases file is also a map, but it is defined in a different
manner and used internally, instead of being referred to in rules.

When information is retrieved from a ldap database, it always ends up being
in a map. This is somewhat problematic with the information stored in the
local-host-names file, because this used to be a class. I have been unable to
fill the class with the information from the map or something alike. That
would be the easy way, but I think it's not possible. (If I'm incorrect about
this, please let me know). Therefore, I had to define a new map, and insert
rules in the sendmail configuration to make sure that (almost) every time
when a value is looked up in the class, the new map is searched for the value
too.

For the maps, the change of configuration is easy. A map is normally defined
with a name and database type, and some database-specific options, (like the
location of the file, for the normally used newdb database types). So for
maps, it suffices to change the definition of the map and voila, we're done.
Ldap maps have a few more options, some of which can be predefined. They are
explained in the following list (largely taken from Booker Bense's document):

Ldap-specific map options in sendmail.cf

-h
    Defines a space-separated list with hostnames of ldap servers. All
    machines will be queried in this order, until a result is found. This can
    be configured globally.
   
-b
    Defines the ldap search base, e.g. the ldap directory you are going to
    search in. This can be configured globally.
   
-k
    Defines the ldap search filter. It is a "sprintf" style string that
    defines how the map takes it's input value and constructs an ldap search.
    It has the form of an ordinary ldap search filter, with %s replaced by
    the value that is searched for. To learn more about ldap search filters
    please see [http://www.cis.ohio-state.edu/htbin/rfc/rfc2254.html] RFC
    2254. The search filter and the search base used above should define a
    search that returns at most one entry. The ldap map will only use the
    first entry it recieves.
   
-v
    Defines the ldap attribute of which the value will be returned by the map
    lookup. Explained in detail later.
   

PLease note that all ldap options must be double-quoted and must immediately
follow the sendmail option. Here is an example:

Kldapexamplemap ldap -h"localhost ldap.myorg.com" -b"ou=mail,dc=myorg,dc=com" -k"(mailstuff)(uid=%s))" -v"mailaddress"
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.1.4. Schema

For this particular setup I have defined a subtree mail in the ldap
directory, under which all mail-related information will be stored. I t would
have been possible to store some of the user-related mail-information in the 
ou=Users subtree, but I have specificalle chosen not to do this. When using a
separate subtree, all information for sendmail is stored in a single place,
and, when having many users, searches may be faster, because not the entire 
ou=Users subtree needs to be searched, but only the ou=mail subtree.

In this subtree two kinds of records will appear.

 1. Entries that hold mappings from the virtuser file and aliases file, for a
    single virtual user. I have chosen to store both mappings in a single
    entry, because this clarifies the effect and configuration used. For this
    I have defined an objectclass inetmailrecipient, and three attributes, 
    mailid, mailacceptinggeneralid and maildrop.
   
    inetmailrecipient
        This is a classification that tells us the entry is some form of
        mapping from one or more real mail addresses and/or mail domains to
        one or more real users.
       
    mailid
        This describes the mail addresses that this virtual user recieves
        mail for. Can be in the form of normail addresses, like foo@myorg.com
        , or complete domains like @my2nd.org. Multiple of these attributes
        may be present, but they should all contain only one value. For each
        of these id's mail is sent to mailacceptinggeneralid.
       
        Here you'll put what you used to put at the left side in the
        virtusers file.
       
    mailacceptinggeneralid
        Defines a virtual user. This is in fact the link between the
        virtusers and aliases file. In each entry, one attribute of this type
        must be present, but no more than one may be present, and the
        attribute may contain only one value. This can either be a local
        username, or a virtual user. In the second case, a maildrop attribute
        must be present, in the first case, it does not.
       
        Here you'll put what you used to put in the virtusers file, and at
        the left side in the aliases file.
       
    maildrop
        Defines the addresses and/or users that mail received for should be
        delivered to. Only one attribute of this type may be present, but it
        may contain a comma-separated list of addresses and/or users. If the
        value of mailacceptinggeneralid is a virtual user, this attribute
        must be present. If the value is a real user, this entry may be
        omitted.
       
        Here you'll put what you used to put at the right side in the aliases
        file.
       
   
    In general, one could say that the mailid and mailacceptinggeneralid
    together provide the functionality of the virtusers file, and 
    mailacceptinggeneralid and maildrop together provide the functionality of
    the aliases file.
   
 2. One or more entries that hold the domain names which would normally apear
    in the sendmail.cw and access files. For this I have defined an
    objectclass inetmaildomain, and three attributes, maildomain, 
    sendmailislokalkey and sendmailaccesskey.
   
    inetmaildomain
        This is a classification that tells us the entry lists mail domains
        which belong to our system, and either should be delivered locally,
        or be relayed to another host.
       
    maildomain
        Defines the mail domain. Multiple of these attributes may be
        presentin a single entry. The value should be the domain without the
        "@".
       
        For each of the dmain entries in the local-host-names file, one of
        these attributes should be present.
       
    sendmailislocalkey
        This defines a simple key that is used in the sendmail rules to
        determine if a domain is local. It can be anything really, but is
        must be the exact string you will use in your sendmail rules. For now
        I have used <LDAPLOCAL>. One attribute of this type must be present,
        and no more than one may be present in each entry.
       
    sendmailaccesskey
        This defines the key that is used in the sendmail rules to determine
        what action needs t be taken for the specified domain. It can be one
        of RELAY, OK, REJECT, DISCARD or an error indicator. (For detailed
        information see the cf/README file from the sendmail sources.)
       
   
        Note: PLease note that in this particular setup I will only be using
        entire domains in the access file. That means that in this case I can
        use the maildomain attribute for both the information used in the 
        access file and the information used in the local-host-names. If you
        want a finer control over your access list, you should define a
        separate entry to hold that information, instead of using the 
        maildomain attribute.
       
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.1.5. More information.

Here are a few sources of information that might be useful:

  * Booker Bense has written a [http://www.stanford.edu/~bbense/ldap/
    Inst.html] document about the usage of ldap with sendmail 8.9.3. He says
    it's the wrong place to start when learning about using sendmail and
    ldap, but it has been of great help to me.
   
  * [http://www.iconimaging.net/~jradford/sendmail/sendmail-ldap.html] A
    short howto about how to setup sendmail with ldap, written by Jason
    Christopher Radford
   
  * [http://ldapman.org/articles/index.html] New articles about ldap and
    sendmail are being published on [http://www.sendmail.net] sendmail.net,
    written by Michael Donnelly, originating from [http:///www.ldapmap.org]
    ldapmap.org, which has also a lot of general interesting ldap-related
    information.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.2. Postfix

6.2.1. Support

Postfix has native ldap support. A lot of options in postfix can be
configured using maps which can be of various types. One of those types is
ldap. For each ldap map a couple of options can be configured. (See Section
6.2.2.)

The process of having postfix look up certain data in an ldap database is
pretty straightforward. The most common use (so i think) is to have postfix
look up virtual users in the ldap database. Together with the above explaind
nss_ldap feature, this allows you to have all your email users in an ldap
database. But other things can be configured too, like the domains postfix is
allowed to relay mail for, or relay mail from, or for which is should act as
a backup mail server.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.2.2. Configuration

The description of the configuration options is completely taken from
LDAP_README in the postfix docs from version 20001217.

server_host
    The name of the host running the LDAP server, e.g.
   
    ldapsource_server_host = ldap.your.com                           
   
    It should be possible with all the libraries mentioned above to specify
    multiple servers separated by spaces, with the libraries trying them in
    order should the first one fail. It should also be possible to give each
    server in the list a different port, by naming them like "ldap.your.com:
    1444".
   
server_port (389)
    The port the LDAP server listens on, e.g.
   
    ldapsource_server_port = 778                                     
   
search_base (No default; you must configure this.)
    The base at which to conduct the search, e.g.
   
    ldapsource_search_base = dc=your, dc=com                         
   
timeout (10 seconds)
    The number of seconds a search can take before timing out, e.g.
   
    ldapsource_timeout = 5                                           
   
query_filter (mailacceptinggeneralid=%s)
    The RFC2254 filter used to search the directory, where %s is a substitute
    for the address Postfix is trying to resolve, e.g.
   
    ldapsource_query_filter = (%s)(paid_up=true))                    
   
domain (No default; you must configure this.)
    This is a list of domain names, paths to files, or dictionaries. If
    specified, only lookups ending in a domain on this list will be searched.
    This can significantly reduce the query load on the LDAP server.
   
    ldapsource_domain = postfix.org, hash:/etc/postfix/searchdomains 
   
result_attribute (maildrop)
    The attribute(s) Postfix will read from any directory entries returned by
    the lookup, to be resolved to an email address.
   
    ldapsource_result_attribute = mailbox,maildrop                   
   
special_result_attribute (No default)
    The attribute(s) of directory entries that can contain DNs or URLs. If
    found, a recursive subsequent search is done using their values.
   
    ldapsource_special_result_attribute = member                     
   
scope (sub)
    The LDAP search scope: sub, base, or one. These translate into
    LDAP_SCOPE_SUBTREE, LDAP_SCOPE_BASE, and LDAP_SCOPE_ONELEVEL.
   
bind (yes)
    Whether or not to bind to the LDAP server. Newer LDAP implementations
    don't require clients to bind, which saves time. Example:
   
    ldapsource_bind = no                                             
   
    If you do need to bind, you might consider configuring Postfix to connect
    to the local machine on a port that's an SSL tunnel to your LDAP server.
    If your LDAP server doesn't natively support SSL, put a tunnel (wrapper,
    proxy, whatever you want to call it) on that system too. This should
    prevent the password from traversing the network in the clear.
   
bind_dn ("")
    If you do have to bind, do it with this distinguished name. Example:
   
    ldapsource_bind_dn = uid=postfix, dc=your, dc=com                
   
bind_pw ("")
    The password for the distinguished name above. If you have to use this,
    you probably want to make main.cf readable only by the Postfix user.
    Example:
   
    ldapsource_bind_pw = postfixpw                                   
   
cache (no)
    Whether to use a client-side cache for the LDAP connection. See
    ldap_enable_cache(3). It's off by default.
   
cache_expiry (30 seconds)
    If the client-side cache is enabled, cached results will expire after
    this many seconds.
   
cache_size (32768 bytes)
    If the client-side cache is enabled, this is its size in bytes.
   
dereference (0)
    When to dereference LDAP aliases. (Note that this has nothing do with
    Postfix aliases.) The permitted values are those legal for the OpenLDAP/
    UM LDAP implementations:
   
    0 never                                        
    1 when searching                               
    2 when locating the base object for the search 
    3 always                                       
   
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.2.3. Example setup

If you want a virtual domain (say foo.virtualdomain.com) and you want to
store email addresses in Ldap for this domain, youwould need the following
piece in your main.cf.

virtual_maps = ldap:ldapvirtual                                              
ldapvirtual_search_base = ou=mail,o=YourOrg,c=nl                             
ldapvirtual_query_filter = (mailacceptinggeneralid=%s)                       
ldapvirtual_domain = foo.virtualdomain.com                                   
ldapvirtual_result_attribute = maildrop                                      
ldapvirtual_bind = no                                                        
ldapvirtual_scope = one                                                      

With this setting, if postfix receives mail for a user with a domain part
"foo.virtualdomain.com", to do a search in the database for entries that have
an attribute mailacceptinggeneralid that matches
"user@foo.virtualdomain.com". If such an entry is found, the values of all
available maildrop attributes are returned, and to these values the mail is
delivered. If "user@foo.virtualdomain.com" is not found, another query is
performed, that tries to match the catchall user, "@foo.virtualdomain.com".
If this is again not found, the message will be bounced.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.3. Qmail

Qmail itself does not have any ldap support. However, there is a patch by
Andre Oppermann that provides ldap support. This package, including the
documentation for it, can be found at [http://www.nrg4u.com] his site.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Address books

A very useful feature of an Ldap database on a linuxserver is that when you
have an internal network in your organization, you can have a single place to
store all your external contacts. You could even divide it in groups, or
departments. It is no longer neccesary to give each employee a seperate
address book. Apart from using Ldap, this could also be done with Microsoft
Exchange Server, Lotus Domino, and Netscape Active Directory.

To use Microsoft Address Book and programs that rely on it, such as Microsoft
Outlook, Microsoft Outlook Express and Microsoft Outlook 2000 there is no
need to change the basic ldap configuration. There are two things that need
to be modified though.

At first, you have to create a directory tree to store your addresses and
relevant data. In Section 11 will be shown which entries will be used in this
tree.

Second, you have to make sure that all hosts on your local network have read
access to this tree. This will be dealt with in the chapter 'security' which
is not finished yet.

All Microsoft Email programs can use the Ldap Directory Services. If you want
to search for people, you have to use the Address Book. When composing a new
email message, a name can be automatically matched to an email address. To do
this, the cn,sn,givenname and mail fields are searched. When you want to
configure your Microsoft email program to use an Ldap server as your address
book, or to look up email addresses, you need to do the following:

 1. Start your favorite email program and open the address book. This can be
    done by selecting Tools, Addressbook from within the program, or via the
    start menu by selecting Start,Programs,Accessories,Address Book.
   
 2. Click on Tools,Accounts to open the Internet Account window.
   
 3. Click Add, now you get an Internet Connection Wizard window, type the ip
    address or hostname of your Ldap server, and click OK.
   
 4. On the next window, answer Yes to confirm you want to check your adresses
    using this directory, or No if you don't want do not want that. Now click
    Next and click Finish.
   
 5. Now you're back at the Internet Account window. Select your newly-added
    account and click Properties.
   
 6. On the properties window, click the Advanced tab.
   
 7. In the Search Base field, enter the base of the tree where your adresses
    will be stored. An example could be ou=Addressbook,dc=yourorg,dc=com.
   
 8. Press OK to close the window and click Close to close the Internet
    Account window. You should have returned to the main Address Book window
    now.
   

Now, when you enter a name in the to: field, the email address is looked up
in the Ldap Directory, and automagically filled in for you. If an entry is
not found, a window is presented, and any typos can be corrected, or a new
search can be done.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Netscape roaming access

ToDo.

A good article on this subject can be found [http://www.linuxworld.com/
linuxworld/lw-1999-09/lw-09-ldap-netscape.html] here.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Publishing digital certificates with LDAP

This section focuses on how to publish digital certificates into an ldap
server. You need to publish digital certificates if you run a Certificaton
Authority. Publishing to LDAP is a simple way to make this information
available in the network .Also many certificate aware software uses LDAP as a
preferred repository for user certificates.

This allows to keep users certificates with the rest of the user information
avoiding useless replication of data.

To deal with certificates you need a cryptographic toolkit, the one used here
is OpenSSL.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

9.1. LDAP Server configuration

The LDAP server used here is OpenLDAP 2.0.x.

Your LDAP server must support objectclasses that allows attributes to store
certificates. In particular you need to store in the LDAP server the
Certification Authority certificate, the Certificate Revocation List, the
Authority Revocation List and end users certificates.

The certificationAuthority objectclass implements the
authorityRevocationList, certificateRevocationList and cACertificate
attributes.

The inetOrgPerson objectclass supports the usercertificate (binary)
attribute.

You can also use the mix-in objectclass strongAuthenticationUser to add
certificates to non inetOrgPerson entries.

You can include required schemas to OpenLDAP including the following schemas
into your slapd.conf file.

                                                                             
include        /usr/local/etc/openldap/schema/core.schema                    
include        /usr/local/etc/openldap/schema/cosine.schema                  
include        /usr/local/etc/openldap/schema/inetorgperson.schema           
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

9.2. Certificate Publishing

Certificates are encoded using ASN.1 DER (Distingushed Encoding Rules). So it
must be published into the LDAP server as a binary piece of data (using BER
encoding).

You can convert a pem certificate into der format using openssl

openssl x509 -outform DER -in incert.pem  -out outcert.der                   

Then an LDIF file can be created using the ldif utility provided with
OpenLDAP. The command:

ldif -b "usercertificate;binary" < outcert.der   > cert.ldif                 

creates an usercertificate attribute encoded in BASE64. You can add this
certificate to an LDIF entry and then use ldapmodify to add the certificate
to an entry.

ldapmodify -x -W -D "cn=Manager,dc=yourorg,dc=com" -f cert.ldif              

Where cert.ldif contains something like:

dn: cn=user,ou=people,dc=yourorg,dc=com                                       
changetype: modify                                                            
add: usercertificate                                                          
usercertificate;binary:: MIIC2TCCAkKgAwIBAgIBADANBgkqhkiG9w0BAQQFADBGMQswCQYD 
 VQQGEwJJVDENMAsGA1UEChMESU5GTjESMBAGA1UECxMJQXV0aG9yaXR5MRQwEgYDVQQDEwtJTkZO 
 IENBICgyKTAeFw05OTA2MjMxMTE2MDdaFw0wMzA4MDExMTE2MDdaMEYxCzAJBgNVBAYTAklUMQ0w 
 CwYDVQQKEwRJTkZOMRIwEAYDVQQLEwlBdXRob3JpdHkxFDASBgNVBAMTC0lORk4gQ0EgKDIpMIGf 
 MA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBAQUAA4GNADCBiQKBgQCrHdRKJsobcjXz/OsGjyq8v73DbggG3JCGrQZ9f1Vm 
 9RrIWJPwggczqgxwWL6JLPKglxbUjAtUxiZm3fw2kX7FGMUq5JaN/Pk2PT4ExA7bYLnbLGZ9jKJs 
 Dh4bNOKrGRIxRO9Ff+YwmH8EQdoVpSRFbBpNnoDIkHLc4DtzB+B4wwIDAQABo4HWMIHTMAwGA1Ud 
 EwQFMAMBAf8wHQYDVR0OBBYEFK3QjOXGc4j9LqYEYTn9WvSRAcusMG4GA1UdIwRnMGWAFK3QjOXG 
 c4j9LqYEYTn9WvSRAcusoUqkSDBGMQswCQYDVQQGEwJJVDENMAsGA1UEChMESU5GTjESMBAGA1UE 
 CxMJQXV0aG9yaXR5MRQwEgYDVQQDEwtJTkZOIENBICgyKYIBADALBgNVHQ8EBAMCAQYwEQYJYIZI 
 AYb4QgEBBAQDAgAHMAkGA1UdEQQCMAAwCQYDVR0SBAIwADANBgkqhkiG9w0BAQQFAAOBgQCDs5b1 
 jmbIYVq2epd5iDjQ109SJ/V7b6DFw2NIl8CWeDPOOjL1E5M8dnlmCDeTR2TlBxqUZaBBJZPqzFdv 
 xpxqsHC0HfkCXAnUe5MaefFNAH9WbxoB/A2pkXtT6WGWed+QsL5wyKJaO4oD9UD5T+x12aGsHcsD 
 Cy3EVEaGEOl+/A==                                                             

It is also possible to specify the certificate in the LDIF file as:

userCertificate;binary:< file:///path/to/cert.der                            
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

9.3. LDAP Aware Clients

Once you stored certificates in the server you may wonder to retrieve them.

Among other clients, Netscape has supprt to retrieve certificates
automatically from an LDAP server. Using the Security Panel-->User
Certificates-->Search Directory; you can search for certificates in the LDAP
dierctory and have them automatically installed in your Netscape certificate
database.

Another client that has good support for certificates is web2ldap [http://
www.web2ldap.de/] www.web2ldap.de
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. SSL/TLS and SSL/TLS wrappers for LDAP

10.1. A Brief description of SSL

The Secure Socket Layer (SSL) is an application layer protocol that provides
a secure transmission channel between parties. It stands between TCP/IP and
application level protocols, such as HTTP, LDAP, SMTP etc... It is based on
public key cryptography systems (various ciphers can be used) and on X.509
certificates.

SSL was initially a Netscape protocol, then it has gone trough a
standardization process and now is called TLS (Transmission Layer Security).
It is commonly referred as SSL/TLS.

The SSL/TLS protocol provides:

  * Data encryption: Client/server session is encrypted
   
  * Server authentication: Client can verify the server identity
   
  * Message integrity: Data is not modified during transmission; this
    prevents "man in the middle" attacks.
   
  * Client authentication: Server can verify the client identity
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.2. SSL/TLS availability for OpenLDAP

Since OpenLDAP 2.0.x, that is an LDAP V3 toolkit, SSL/TLS is provided by the
server. OpenLDAP 2.0.x needs to be compiled using the OpenSSL library to add
SSL/TLS. It also has Start-TLS support.

   
    Note: Start-TLS allows to enable TLS if the client requests it. This way
    it is possible to use only an LDAP port for both secure and insecure
    connections.
   
OpenLDAP 1.2.x, instead, is an LDAP V2 protocol implementation and does not
provide SSL/TLS.

Valuable information on SSL/TLS on OpenLDAP 2.0.x can be found on the
OpenLDAP web site, here we will focus how to use an SSL tunnel to secure LDAP
parties that are not SSL/TLS aware
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

10.3. How to use stunnel to provide SSL/TLS to an LDAP V2 server

If you use OpenLDAP 1.2.x you need a general purpose SSL wrapper to add SSL
capabilities to the server. Stunnel ([http://www.stunnel.org]
www.stunnel.org) has been found to be stable and suitable for this
application.

Installing it is quite simple, but first you have to install OpenSSL ([http:/
/www.OpenSSL.org] www.OpenSSL.org) to have the required library and tools.

OpenSSL, is an open source implementation of the SSL protocol that provides
the SSL library and a set of cryptography tools.

To install OpenSSL you have to type the following commands:

$ ./config                                                                   
$ make                                                                       
$ make test                                                                  
# make install                                                               

usually, everything will be installed in /usr/local/ssl.

If OpenSSL is correctly installed the only command needed to compile and
install stunnel are:

$ ./configure                                                                
$ make                                                                       
# make install                                                               

Stunnel uses a server certificate for SSL, this can be a self signed
certificate, or, better, a certificate signed by your own Certification
Authority (the SSL client has to trust the CA too).

A commonly used place used to store such certificate is:

/usr/local/ssl/certs/stunnel.pem                                             

If having a Certification Authority is not a concern, a self signed
certificate can be produced using the tools provided by the OpenSSL suite.

In the stunnel directory (to use the configuration file stunnel.cnf) type the
following commands:

$ openssl req -new -x509 -days 365 -nodes -config stunnel.cnf \              
            -out stunnel.pem -keyout stunnel.pem                             
$ openssl gendh 512 >> stunnel.pem                                           

This will produce a self signed certificate, valid for a year, in the file
stunnel.pem.

Once stunnel is installed, you can start up first the LDAP server on port 389
(the default LDAP port):

#/usr/local/libexec/slapd                                                    

Then stunnel on port 636 (the port used by LDAPS client):

# /usr/local/sbin/stunnel  -r ldap  -d 636 \                                 
 -p /usr/local/ssl/certs/stunnel.pem                                         

For debugging you can start stunnel in foreground with the following syntax:

# /usr/local/sbin/stunnel  -r ldap  -d 636 \                                 
 -D 7 -f -p /usr/local/ssl/certs/stunnel.pem                                 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

10.4. How to use stunnel to provide SSL to LDAP clients

Many LDAP client are not SSL aware, anyway, it is possible using stunnel in
client mode, to provide SSL to these clients.

This is quite simple. You can start stunnel on the client host, using the
LDAPS port, and forward requests to this port to the actual LDAP server:

# stunnel -c -d 636 -r  ldapserver.yourorg.com:636                           

Now LDAP clients must be configured using localhost:636 as the LDAPS server
to use.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

10.5. How to use stunnel to provide SSL for slurpd replication

At the moment slurpd (slapd replication daemon) hasn't SSL capabilities,
anyway you can use stunnel in client mode to have this job done.

Using stunnel in client mode on the master, you can forward a local port to a
remote port:

# stunnel -c -d 9636 -r  ldapreplica.yourorg.com:636                         

and have on the master LDAP server in slapd.conf

replica host=localhost:9636                                                  
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Ldap schema's

Warning: this section is terribly incomplete and outdated. I should be
updating it, adding the various rfc's or other authoritive sources of
schematic data.

This is a proposition of a schema that can be used to accommodate all the
data needed for the previously listed functions. It should under no
circumstances be regarded as authoritative. It is an example that should
serve it's purpose, but it is likely you have to adapt it to match your
specific needs.

Because it has been a lot of work (for me, maybe it's out there but I don't
know where?) to find out the specific meaning of each entry, and what
information it should contain, I'll try to do this as well. It should be
noted, however, that it doesn't fit together seamlessly. The Microsoft
Addressbook does not seem to use some of the fields it is presenting. I
suspect that for the "Title", "Nickname", "Home City", "Home State/Province",
"Home ZIP Code", "Home Country/Region" and "Home Web Page" entries no
information is requested. For the "Personal", "Netmeeting" and "Digital IDs"
I didn't yet bother to figure out how it should be put in the Ldap database.
Any information is welcome. The netscape address book has a similar problem.
When a record is copied from an LDap directory to a local address book, some
of the fields are lost. As the nature of an company-wide addressbook should
discourage users to copy addresses locally, this is not a big problem though.
But netscape address book has another little oddity though. In a normal
address record, the Ldap attribute associated with "Nickname" is 
xmozillanickname. When searching for addresses however, the associated
attribute is simple nickname. That is the reason why the nickname entry shows
up twice in the schema.

This schema is known to work with Microsoft Outlook 2000, and Netscape 4.73.
If you find I'm wrong about a description, function, or neccessity of an
entry, please do let me know!

The schema file that represent this schema can be found in Section 12.1.

Table 1. Ldap attributes and objectclasses - quick description
+---------+--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|Function |Objectclass         |Attributes                   |Description   |(Default)  |
|         |                    |                             |              |value      |
+---------+--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|User     |top                 |                             |default       |           |
|accounts |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |ou                           |Organizational|Users      |
|         |                    |                             |Unit          |           |
|         +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |person              |                             |Owner is a    |           |
|         |                    |                             |person        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |uid                          |unix login    |foo        |
|         |                    |                             |name          |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |cn                           |Common Name   |Foo Bar    |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |sn                           |Surname       |Bar        |
|         +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |account             |                             |Owner has an  |           |
|         |                    |                             |account       |           |
|         +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |posixaccount        |                             |Owner has a   |           |
|         |                    |                             |Unix account  |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |uidNumber                    |uid           |513        |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |gidNumber                    |gid           |100        |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |homedirectory                |Home directory|/home/users|
|         |                    |                             |              |/foo       |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |userpassword                 |unix password |S3cr3t     |
|         +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |sambaaccount        |                             |Owner has a   |           |
|         |                    |                             |samba account |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |ntuid                        |Unknown       |uid        |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |rid                          |Unknown       |uidnumber  |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |lmpassword                   |Lanman        |Unused     |
|         |                    |                             |password hash |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |ntpasswd                     |NT password   |Unused     |
|         |                    |                             |hash          |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |loginshell                   |Users shell   |/bin/      |
|         |                    |                             |              |pleurop    |
+---------+--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|Machine  |top                 |                             |default       |           |
|accounts |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |ou                           |Organizational|Machines   |
|         |                    |                             |Unit          |           |
|         +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |posixaccount        |                             |Owner has a   |           |
|         |                    |                             |unix account  |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |uid                          |login name    |speed$     |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |uidnumber                    |unix uid      |514        |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |gidnumber                    |gid           |100        |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |homedirectory                |Home directory|Unused     |
+---------+--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|Microsoft|top                 |                             |default       |           |
|Address  |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|Book     |                    |ou                           |Organizational|Addressbook|
|         |                    |                             |Unit          |           |
|         +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |microsoftaddressbook|                             |Owner has     |           |
|         |                    |                             |Microsofts    |           |
|         |                    |                             |Addressbook   |           |
|         |                    |                             |properties    |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |cn                           |Name          |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |c                            |Business      |           |
|         |                    |                             |country       |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |department                   |Business      |           |
|         |                    |                             |department    |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |facsimiletelephonenumber     |Business fax  |           |
|         |                    |                             |number        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |givenname                    |First name    |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |homephone                    |Home phone    |           |
|         |                    |                             |number        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |homepostaladdress            |Home postal   |           |
|         |                    |                             |address       |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |info                         |Notes         |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |initials                     |Initials      |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |l                            |Business city |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |mail                         |Email address |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |mobile                       |Home cellphone|           |
|         |                    |                             |number        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |organizationname             |Company name  |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |otherfacsimiletelephonenumber|Home fax      |           |
|         |                    |                             |number        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |otherpager                   |Business pager|can be     |
|         |                    |                             |number        |"pager"    |
|         |                    |                             |              |too?       |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |physicaldeliveryofficename   |Location of   |           |
|         |                    |                             |office at work|           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |postaladdress                |Business      |           |
|         |                    |                             |postal address|           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |postalcode                   |Business      |           |
|         |                    |                             |postal code   |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |sn                           |Last Name     |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |st                           |Business state|           |
|         |                    |                             |/province     |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |telephonenumber              |Business phone|           |
|         |                    |                             |number        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |title                        |Job title     |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |url                          |Business web  |           |
|         |                    |                             |page          |           |
+---------+--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|Netscape |top                 |                             |default       |           |
|Address  |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|Book     |                    |ou                           |Organizational|Addressbook|
|         |                    |                             |Unit          |           |
|         +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |netscapeaddressbook |                             |Owner has     |           |
|         |                    |                             |Netscape's    |           |
|         |                    |                             |properties    |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |cn                           |Name          |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |cellphone                    |Cellphone     |           |
|         |                    |                             |number        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |countryname                  |Country       |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |description                  |Description   |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |facsimiletelephonenumber     |Fax number    |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |givenname                    |First Name    |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |homephone                    |Home phone    |           |
|         |                    |                             |number        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |homeurl                      |Personal web  |           |
|         |                    |                             |page          |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |locality                     |Home city     |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |mail                         |Email address |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |nickname                     |Nickname      |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |o                            |Company       |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |ou                           |Department    |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |pagerphone                   |Pager number  |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |postalcode                   |Home postal   |           |
|         |                    |                             |code          |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |sn                           |Last name     |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |st                           |State         |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |streetaddress                |Home postal   |           |
|         |                    |                             |address       |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |telephonenumber              |Business phone|           |
|         |                    |                             |number        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |title                        |Title         |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |xmozillaanyphone             |Business phone|           |
|         |                    |                             |number        |           |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |xmozillanickname             |Nickname      |Same as    |
|         |                    |                             |              |nickname   |
|         |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|         |                    |xmozillausehtmlmail          |Client uses   |TRUE       |
|         |                    |                             |html mail     |           |
+---------+--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|Netscape |top                 |                             |default       |           |
|roaming  |                    +-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+
|access   |                    |ou                           |Organizational|Roaming    |
|         |                    |                             |Unit          |           |
+---------+--------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+-----------+

   
    Note: Netscape and Microsoft use the addressbook entries in a slightly
    different way. Netscape stores a postal address in the streetaddress
    entry in a base64 encoded string, while Microsoft uses the postaladdress
    entry. However, when a streetaddress entry is present, Microsoft uses
    this instead of the postaladdress entry, but it's value is stored
    plaintext, not base64 encoded. So you cannot use them at the same time.
   
More information about Ldap schema's in general can be found on [http://
ldap.hklc.com/] Linux Center. I found a document describing Microsoft
Addressbook's properties on the [http://msdn.microsoft.com/library/psdk/adsi/
gluser_4437.htm] Microsoft Developers Network.

Beware, the description given on the Microsoft page doesn't match the fields
where the content shows up in address book. Also, not all fields in address
book contain information, but if the listed keys don't work I wouldn't know
which keys do work.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Example files

Here are the example files that can be used to setup an installation as I
described here.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

12.1. The schema file

# Unix related and default classes (Modified)                                
                                                                             
attribute       userpassword                            ces                  
attribute       telephonenumber                         tel                  
attribute       facsimiletelephonenumber        fax     tel                  
attribute       pagertelephonenumberpager               tel                  
attribute       homephone                               tel                  
attribute       mobiletelephonenumber           mobile  tel                  
attribute       member                                  dn                   
attribute       owner                                   dn                   
attribute       dn                                      dn                   
                                                                             
objectclass top                                                              
        requires                                                             
                objectClass                                                  
                                                                             
objectclass organization                                                     
        requires                                                             
                objectClass,                                                 
                o                                                            
        allows                                                               
                description                                                  
                                                                             
objectclass organizationalUnit                                               
        requires                                                             
                objectClass,                                                 
                ou                                                           
        allows                                                               
                description                                                  
                                                                             
objectclass person                                                           
        requires                                                             
                objectClass,                                                 
                cn                                                           
        allows                                                               
                description                                                  
                                                                             
objectclass account                                                          
        requires                                                             
                objectClass,                                                 
                uid                                                          
        allows                                                               
                description,                                                 
                host,                                                        
                o,                                                           
                ou                                                           
                                                                             
# Samba related classes (Original)                                           
                                                                             
objectclass sambaaccount                                                     
        requires                                                             
                objectclass,                                                 
                uid,                                                         
                uidnumber,                                                   
                ntuid,                                                       
                rid                                                          
        allows                                                               
                gidnumber,                                                   
                grouprid,                                                    
                nickname,                                                    
                userpassword,                                                
                ou,                                                          
                description,                                                 
                lmpassword,                                                  
                ntpassword,                                                  
                pwdlastset,                                                  
                smbhome,                                                     
                homedrive,                                                   
                script,                                                      
                profile,                                                     
                workstations,                                                
                acctflags,                                                   
                pwdcanchange,                                                
                pwdmustchange                                                
                                                                             
objectclass sambagroup                                                       
        requires                                                             
                cn,                                                          
                rid                                                          
        allows                                                               
                ntuid,                                                       
                member,                                                      
                description                                                  
                                                                             
objectclass sambaconfig                                                      
        requires                                                             
                id                                                           
        allows                                                               
                nextrid                                                      
                                                                             
objectclass sambabuiltin                                                     
        requires                                                             
                cn,                                                          
                sid                                                          
        allows                                                               
                ntuid,                                                       
                rid,                                                         
                member,                                                      
                description                                                  
                                                                             
# Sendmail related class (new / modified)                                    
                                                                             
objectclass inetmailrecipient                                                
        requires                                                             
                objectclass                                                  
        allows                                                               
                mailid,                                                      
                mailacceptinggeneralid,                                      
                maildrop                                                     
                                                                             
objectclass inetmaildomain                                                   
        requires                                                             
                objectclass,                                                 
                sendmailislocalkey                                           
        allows                                                               
                maildomain,                                                  
                sendmailaccesskey                                            
                                                                             
# Addressbook related classes                                                
                                                                             
objectclass netscapeaddressbook                                              
        requires                                                             
                objectclass,                                                 
                cn                                                           
        allows                                                               
                cellphone,                                                   
                countryname,                                                 
                description,                                                 
                facsimiletelephonenumber,                                    
                givenname,                                                   
                homephone,                                                   
                homeurl,                                                     
                locality,                                                    
                mail,                                                        
                nickname,                                                    
                o,                                                           
                ou,                                                          
                pagerphone,                                                  
                postalcode,                                                  
                sn,                                                          
                st,                                                          
                streetaddress,                                               
                telephonenumber,                                             
                title,                                                       
                xmozillanickname,                                            
                xmozillausehtmlmail,                                         
                xmozillaanyphone                                             
                                                                             
objectclass microsoftaddressbook                                             
        requires                                                             
                objectclass,                                                 
                cn                                                           
        allows                                                               
                c,                                                           
                department,                                                  
                facsimiletelephonenumber,                                    
                givenname,                                                   
                homephone,                                                   
                homepostaladdress,                                           
                info,                                                        
                initials,                                                    
                l,                                                           
                mail,                                                        
                mobile,                                                      
                organizationname,                                            
                otherfacsimiletelephonenumber,                               
                otherpager,                                                  
                physicaldeliveryofficename,                                  
                postaladdress,                                               
                postalcode,                                                  
                sn,                                                          
                st,                                                          
                telephonenumber,                                             
                title,                                                       
                url                                                          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

12.2. Example base ldif

dn: dc=yourorg,dc=com                                                             
objectClass: top                                                                  
objectClass: organization                                                         
o: YourOrg                                                                        
description: This is our organizations base dn. Everything is stored beneath this 
                                                                                  
dn: ou=Users,dc=yourorg,dc=com                                                    
objectClass: top                                                                  
objectClass: organizationalunit                                                   
ou: Users                                                                         
description: This is the tree were user accounts are stored                       
                                                                                  
dn: ou=Machines,dc=yourorg,dc=com                                                 
objectClass: top                                                                  
objectClass: organizationalunit                                                   
ou: Machines                                                                      
description: This is the tree were machine accounts are stored                    
                                                                                  
dn: ou=Roaming,dc=yourorg,dc=com                                                  
objectClass: top                                                                  
objectClass: organizationalunit                                                   
ou: Roaming                                                                       
description: This is the tree were netscape roaming profiles are stored           
                                                                                  
dn: ou=Addressbook,dc=yourorg,dc=com                                              
objectClass: top                                                                  
objectClass: organizationalunit                                                   
ou: Addressbook                                                                   
description: This is the tree were addressbook entries are stored                 

Notes

[1]  A mechanism that permits LDAP database replication between servers.     
[2]  It is not a case that these are the maps provided by NIS.               
[3]  An entry can belong to several objectclasses.                           
[4]  In a tricky way, it is also possible to use the Netscape Communicator   
     certificate database.                                                   
