Cable Modem Providers HOWTO

Vladimir Vuksan

            vuksan@veus.hr
         
Revision History                                                             
Revision v4.30          June 13, 2001             Revised by: vv             
Many different updates.                                                      


This document attempts to answer basic questions on how to connect your Linux
box to cable modem or cable Internet provider.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
    1.1. New Versions of this Document
    1.2. Feedback
    1.3. Contributors
    1.4. Standard Disclaimer
    1.5. Copyright Information
   
   
2. Setting up your Ethernet Card
3. Regular Cable Modem ISPs
    3.1. ATT (formerly MediaOne)
    3.2. @Home
        3.2.1. Notes from Hampton Roads VA, Phoenix AZ, Arlington TX and
            Champaign/Urbana IL
        3.2.2. Notes for Baltimore, MD and Colleyville,TX
        3.2.3. Notes for Milpitas, CA, USA
        3.2.4. Notes for Salt Lake City, UT, USA
        3.2.5. Notes from Connecticut, USA
        3.2.6. Notes from Dallas, TX or anyone using Motorola CyberSurfr
        3.2.7. Notes from Louisville, KY by Devin Bundrent <
            mrscoobdoo@home.com>
        3.2.8. Notes from Madison, WI and Lakeridge, VA
        3.2.9. Notes from Baton Rouge, LA by Van Goodwin <
            positron@redstroke.com>
        3.2.10. Notes from Richmond, VA and its surroundings by Robert
            Marshall <no_robmars_spam@yahoo.com>
        3.2.11. Notes from Mobile, Alabama R. Jason Valentine <
            miracle@procyon.com>:
        3.2.12. Notes from Auburn, Alabama by Andrew W. Jones <
            andywjones@home.com>
        3.2.13. Notes from Santa Barbara, California by Tim Newsome <
            nuisance@DELETE_BEFORE_SENDINGcmu.edu>
        3.2.14. Notes from Connecticut, USA
       
       
    3.3. RoadRunner
    3.4. Rogers@Home
    3.5. Sunflower Cablevision
    3.6. Jones Intercable
    3.7. GTE Worldwind
    3.8. SpeedChoice, Phoenix, Arizona
    3.9. Cedar Falls Utilities Cybernet, Cedar Falls, Iowa
    3.10. Telstra Big Pond Advance, Australia
    3.11. Fibertel, Buenos Aires, Argentina
    3.12. Videotron (Videon), Canada
    3.13. Telekabel (Teleweb), Austria
    3.14. Shaw Cable, Canada
    3.15. Cogeco Cable, Canada
    3.16. Optimum Online, New York and Connecticut
    3.17. Singapore Cable Vision, Singapore
    3.18. Cable Wanadoo, France and Netherlands (formerly Casema)
    3.19. Prime Cable Expressnet, Las Vegas, NV
    3.20. Chello Belgium, formerly TVD, Belgium
    3.21. Telenet Vlaanderen, Belgium
    3.22. Total-Web, United States
    3.23. CyberCable, Paris, France
    3.24. Chello (UPC) Stockholm, Sweden (formerly StjärnTV)
    3.25. GCI.Net, Alaska
    3.26. Saturn Communication NZ Ltd, New Zealand
    3.27. Chello, Netherlands
    3.28. Adelphia Powerlink, USA
    3.29. 21st Century Telecom, Chicago, IL, USA
    3.30. HTVi, Helsinki, Finland
    3.31. Garden State Cable, New Jersey
    3.32. Zoom Internet, Butler County, PA
    3.33. Charter Pipeline
    3.34. Netcabo, TV Cabo, Portugal
    3.35. Supercable, Spain
    3.36. NTL, United Kingdom
    3.37. Virtua, São Paulo, Brazil
    3.38. Hathway, Bombay, India
    3.39. Siti Cable, Bangalore, India
    3.40. Com Hem, Sweden
        3.40.1. 1. Setting up a single node
        3.40.2. 2. Connecting your home LAN (if you have more than one
            machine)
        3.40.3. You from the internet
        3.40.4. Problems:
       
       
    3.41. SwissOnLine HiSpeed Internet, Switzerland
    3.42. Liwest, Austria
    3.43. Blueyonder from Telewest, United Kingdom
    3.44. CableNet, Colombia
    3.45. Brutele, Belgium
    3.46. Optus @Home, Australia
    3.47. Destiny Cable, Philippines
    3.48. Retecal, Spain
    3.49. Netvisao, Portugal
    3.50. Longview Cable - Cablelynx
    3.51. Soon Communications Plc, Finland
    3.52. InstaNet, Oregon
   
   
4. Hybrid Cable modem ISPs
    4.1. Adelphia Powerlink, USA
    4.2. LinkExpress, Brasil
    4.3. ExpressNet, Maryland
    4.4. Charter Pipeline, Riverside, CA
    4.5. Chambers Cable, Chico, CA / Fundy Cable, New Brunswick
    4.6. Smyrna Cable, Atlanta, GA
    4.7. Amnet de Costa Rica, Costa Rica
    4.8. Prime Cable, Chicago, IL
    4.9. Millennium Digital Media, Maryland
    4.10. Rock Hill Telephone (RHTC) and Fort Mill Telephone (FMTC), South
        Carolina
   
   

1. Introduction

The main goal of this document is to get your system running with your cable
modem, and cable internet provider. Unfortunately, many ISPs that provide
cable modem services, give you Windows and Macintosh software only.

This document attempts to explain how to setup some cable modems and internet
providers in Linux, the tricks to get them working correctly, and the traps
not to fall down. It is hoped that this document will assist you, however we
make no claims for the validity of the information contained within.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.1. New Versions of this Document

The newest version of this HOWTO will always first be made available on

[http://www.cs.unm.edu/~vuksan/linux/Cable-Modem.html] http://www.cs.unm.edu/
~vuksan/linux/Cable-Modem.html
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.2. Feedback

Feedback is most certaintly welcome for this document. Without your
submissions and input, this document wouldn't exist. So, please send your
additions, comments and criticisms to <vuksan-feedback@veus.hr>.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.3. Contributors

The following people have contributed to this mini-HOWTO.

  * Dan Sullivan <dsulli@home.com>
   
  * Andrew Novick
   
  * Michael Strates
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.4. Standard Disclaimer

No liability for the contents of this documents can be accepted. Use the
concepts, examples and other content at your own risk. As this is a new
edition of this document, there may be errors and inaccuracies, that may of
course be damaging to your system. Proceed with caution, and although this is
highly unlikely, I don't take any responsibility for that.

Also bear in mind that this is NOT official information. Obtaining official
information is usually an impossibility with many ISPs. Much content in this
document are assumptions, which appear to work for people. Use the
information at your own risk.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.5. Copyright Information

This document is copyrighted (c) 1998 Vladimir Vuksan and distributed under
the terms of the OpenContent License (OPL). Full text of the license can be
found at [http://www.opencontent.org/opl.shtml] http://www.opencontent.org/
opl.shtml
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Setting up your Ethernet Card

All of the setups below use ethernet cards (network cards) to connect you
somehow to the Internet. That is why first we need to check if your ethernet
card is working and most importantly can be used (read is supported) in
Linux. There is a comprehensive Ethernet HOWTO at [http://www.linuxdoc.org/
HOWTO/Ethernet-HOWTO.html] http://www.linuxdoc.org/HOWTO/Ethernet-HOWTO.html
if you would like to read it otherwise try this.

Boot into Linux, During boot up a message like this should appear...
eth0: 3c509 at 0x300 tag 1, 10baseT port, address  00 20 af ee 01 23, IRQ 10. 
3c509.c:1.07 6/15/95 becker@cesdis.gsfc.nasa.gov                              

If you missed it type dmesg.

If you see a message like that you are set and you can go to the next
section. If you can't see a message like this there are two possible
explanations, your ethernet card is PNP (plug-n-play) and you need to use
tools such as isapnptools to get it recognized (I am not quite sure on this
because I don't have a single PNP card so correct me if I am wrong). The
other explanation is that you need to set up your card.

Most cards today come with DOS programs that are used to setup your card. For
example to get my 3COM 3c509 to work all I needed to do is boot into DOS and
use a utility to configure my card. There is usually a Auto Configure option.
If that does not solve your problem try changing the IRQ for the card using
the same utility. I find that usually IRQs 10,11 and 12 work well. If none of
this solves your problem please read the Ethernet HOWTO referenced above or
post to a newsgroup such as comp.os.linux.setup or comp.os.linux.networking.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Regular Cable Modem ISPs

If you think you have the card recognized you have to now look at the entry
for your ISP. I have sorted the information according to a provider because
setups are mostly ISP specific.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1. ATT (formerly MediaOne)

MediaOne Express is a Internet cable service provided by MediaOne. The
hardware setup consists of a cable modem produced by LanCity or General
Instruments which plugs into an ethernet card using a 10BaseT (UTP-45) cable.
Assignment of IP addresses and other networking information is done using
DHCP which stands for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol. The only thing you
need to do is read the DHCP mini-HOWTO and configure your system
appropriately. There is no other necessary configuration. DHCP mini-HOWTO can
be found at [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] http://www.oswg.org/
oswg-nightly/DHCP.html.

Most of Mediaone/RoadRunner tracks you're MAC (ethernet) address, and won't
allow any other MAC address to use the CableModem.

To get around this you could either call Mediaone and ask them to change
you're MAC address to you're current one. They do allow you to have multiple
allowed MAC addresses, but they might not allow more than two. Other approach
is to tell your ethernet card what MAC address to use. Most cards will allow
it. So first make sure you write down the MAC address of the card you used
when Mediaone technicians showed up and they type something like this:
ifconfig eth0 hw ether 00:23:56:74:25:12                                     

Additional notes by Peter Zurich:

Pump will not work without specifying the hostname ("-h fubar") on the
command line. It doesn't seem to matter what exactly you give it as the
hostname, as long as you give something.

Notes from Seattle, Washington area

You have to supply the -h option to dhcpcd if you want to get your service
running. "windowsidentification" is the one ATT provides you and is REQUIRED
for it to work. it ends in a "-a". For example
dhcpd -h {windowsidentification -->'cXXXXXX-a'} eth0                         

Alternatively if you would like to use pump check out the notes of user in 
Mobile, Alabama.

Information about ATT Broadband can be found at [http://
www.broadband.att.com] http://www.broadband.att.com.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2. @Home

@Home uses a similar setup to ATT (formerly MediaOne). However, there are a
few fundamental differences, outlined by contributors. Since @Home spans
different geographic locations you might get assigned different kind of
equipment and have slightly different kind of setups.

Before you try anything, go to control panel, network, and properties for
your network card. Write down all of the information. You will need it later.

TCI, the company that runs @Home issues a Etherlink III 3c509b NIC for all of
their customers. What TCI does not tell you is that when they install your
ethernet card, it is in PnP mode. Now in Slakware, if you uncomment the
proper line for this card, everything will appear to be working fine. There
will be no system problems, but the 'PC' light on your CyberSURFR modem will
never turn on. If you are using Slakware, and are having this problem, reboot
in DOS and skip the next paragraph.

In RedHat 5, your system will have some trouble autodetecting the card. If
you try to pass the paramaters manually, the system will hang. This should be
obvious that your card is not setup properly. Before wasting anymore time,
reboot in DOS (This is a must because as of 12/25/97, there is no utility
written for Linux to turn off PnP and turn on ISA.)

TCI does not give out a utility disk for your ethernet card, so you must
download the utility from one of 3Com's sites. Here is a link to 3COM's page
for driver download.

[http://support.3com.com/infodeli/tools/nic/index.htm] http://
support.3com.com/infodeli/tools/nic/index.htm

Once you have downloaded your driver files you will need to run them and
disable the PNP mode of your network card.

What you've now done will make your ethernet card 'broken' in Windows 95.
You'll need to go to Control Panel, Network, and remove the network card and
the adapter. Reboot your computer, and again go back to control panel. Go to
add/remove new hardware, and have it autodetect. It will automatically setup
the correct i/o address for you. You will most likely need to reboot again.
Now you should be in Windows 95, with the 'PC' light on your cable modem on.
You will also notice that none of your internet applications seem to work,
you can't ping, and you can't resolve DNS. You now must go back to control
panels, network, and click on properties for your network card (not the
adapter). Re-enter all the data you wrote down, and reboot.

With a little luck, your ethernet card should be working in Windows 95, and
ready to rock in Linux.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.1. Notes from Hampton Roads VA, Phoenix AZ, Arlington TX and Champaign/
Urbana IL

With the @home service in Hampton Roads, VA, it is absolutly neccessary to
run dhcpcd-0.70 (or higher) that supports the "-h" option to specify the
hostname of your computer. Without this switch the @home dhcpcd server will
not assign addresses.

@Home user from Hampton Roads Scott Stancil <sstancil@home.com> has provided
an RPM that can be used to easily configure @Home connection. Check it out at
[http://www.linuxforum.com/plug/projects.html] http://www.linuxforum.com/plug
/projects.html

More information on setting up dhcpcd-0.70 and @Home service with Intel Ether
Express cards can be found at [http://www.monmouth.com/~jay/Linux/] http://
www.monmouth.com/~jay/Linux/
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.2. Notes for Baltimore, MD and Colleyville,TX

In Baltimore subscribers are issued Intel Ether Express Pro 10 nics and a
static IP number.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.3. Notes for Milpitas, CA, USA

Information provided by Joe Byrne

@Home service assignes 3Com 509b cards. IP addresses assigned statically.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.4. Notes for Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Information provided by <akaiceman@hotmail.com>.

@home (at least in the Salt Lake City, Utah areas, i'm not sure if this is
everywhere yet) has started giving out 3com 900B NIC's, unless you ask for a
ISA card in particular. 3COM 900B are PCI based ethernet cards which might
require kernel recompilation.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.5. Notes from Connecticut, USA

Information provided by <dan@sidhe.org>.

The @Home folks are using Motorola cable modems (I know, I got one) in
addition to any other brand folks have reported. If it's getting hooked into
a hub it needs to either get plugged in with a twisted-pair cross-over cable
or go into the 'to other hubs' port if your hub has one. (Which is standard,
I expect, for these things, but useful to keep in mid if, like me, you're
hooking the thing on to an existing local network) I have a plain Compaq 10/
100 ethernet card (I think it's the NC3131, but I'm not 100% sure) in my
linux box and it worked without a hitch.

Also, they are handing out fixed IP addresses, at least in Connecticut, and
you can get up to three. (They charge $4.95/mo for each extra IP address they
allocate) They make no requirements on the OSes on these extra machines--I've
a Vax running VMS and they didn't bat an eye when I signed it up. They did
want the initial machine to be something they recognized (I booted over to
Win98 for the duration) but they would've handled a linux-only install if
really, *really* pressed
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.6. Notes from Dallas, TX or anyone using Motorola CyberSurfr

If you have a Motorola CyberSurfr cable modem you will need to press the
reset key on the back of the modem if you switch network cards. The ethernet
card hardware address is read by the modem and once it is setup if the card
is switched it must be reset.Just press the reset key for 10+ seconds and it
will reread.

If you are still not able to get your cable connection going check out
mini-HOWTO for cable modems and Cox@Home at [http://www.kernel-panic.com/
user_files/cox.at.home.html] http://www.kernel-panic.com/user_files/
cox.at.home.html

Update from James Stormes <jstormes@gtfcu.com>

@Home has been upgrading the cable modem system in Bedford Texas (the area
around Dallas Texas). I have found that with the new system your NIC's MAC
address must match what the cable system has. That is the Linux system you
plug into the cable modem must use the same MAC that is programmed into the
board you got from @Home. I use two diffrent computers on the cable modem
(Linux and Windows) so this was a problem.

For some NIC drivers you can specify the MAC. For example in n REDHAT 6.1 in
the /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eth0 you can add the line MACADDR=
"0F4F3E54A659". Where eth0 is the NIC card attached to the cable modem and
the 0F4F3E54A659 is the MAC that the cable modem system is expecting.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.7. Notes from Louisville, KY by Devin Bundrent <mrscoobdoo@home.com>

As of now, @Home/Insight issues Realtek RTL8029(AS) PCI Ethernet NICs, and
Static IP addresses. In addition, the customers of the service are given(by
default, others can be bought, and used) the RCA DCM105 Digital Cable Modem,
without utilities disk.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.8. Notes from Madison, WI and Lakeridge, VA

I have a cable modem from Bresnan in madison wi, they use the @home network
for internet trafic and supply there users with the RCA cable modems. In the
howto it states that the -h flag should be used for the host name with
dhcpcd. That didn't work for me. They provided me with a machine name of
cb46597-a.mdsn1.wi.home.com, the cd46597-a obviously being my hosts name....
anyway.. the flag I had to use to get dhcpcd working was the -I flag for
ClientID. ClientID is actually the MAC (Ethernet) address of your NIC e.g.
00:00:21:61:7C:F0.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.9. Notes from Baton Rouge, LA by Van Goodwin <positron@redstroke.com>

Here, @Home doesn't seem to have a standard ethernet card. They gave me a
"SMC EtherEZ" ISA card, but I've seen them install totally different cards in
other systems. The installer told me they gave static IP addresses to people
who use Windows NT and dynamic to everyone else. Don't ask me why.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.10. Notes from Richmond, VA and its surroundings by Robert Marshall <
no_robmars_spam@yahoo.com>

In Chesterfield County, Virginia (a suburb of Richmond), @Home offers cable
modem service through the local cable provider, Comcast. The service runs
very well with Linux. As with many @Home locations, IP addresses are assigned
via dhcp, and they require that all dhcp request packets contain the user's
@Home-assigned hostname. The dhcpcd package works well for this, using the -h
parameter. Personal best download - 16Mbytes in 54 seconds.

In Henrico County, Hanover County, and the city of Richmond, Virginia,
MediaOne is offerring their Road Runner service. IP addresses are assigned
using dhcp, but are exclusively reserved by MAC address. This requires that
the user call MediaOne support if the MAC address attached to the cable modem
ever changes. The MediaOne people refused to re-register my friend's new MAC
address when he told them that he had purchased a personal firewall from
NetGear. They even tried to insist that he purchase commercial service, even
though he was only going to have one PC connected to the service. Thus, I
strongly agree with your wording in the HOWTO that MediaOne customers
carefully avoid mentioning the words "router", "firewall", or "Linux".
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.11. Notes from Mobile, Alabama R. Jason Valentine <miracle@procyon.com>:

In Mobile, Comcast cable provides cable modem service through the @home
network. An RCA cable modem (model DCM205) is issued along with a SMC EZ-Card
(10/100) if you don't already have a cable modem.

Static IPs are not given, but rather assigned through DHCP. You need to make
your ethernet card (eth*) use DHCP - linuxconf is the easiest way to set that
up. Next, you'll need to find the following line in /sbin/ifup
-----------------------------------------------------------------            
if [ -n "$PUMP" ]; then                                                      
     echo -n "Determining IP information for $DEVICE..."                     
     if /sbin/pump -i $DEVICE; then                                          
         echo " done."                                                       
     else                                                                    
         echo " failed."                                                     
         exit 1                                                              
     fi                                                                      
 else ...                                                                    
-----------------------------------------------------------------            

and change it to
-----------------------------------------------------------------            
if [ -n "$PUMP" ]; then                                                      
     echo -n "Determining IP information for $DEVICE..."                     
     if /sbin/pump -i $DEVICE -h YOURHOSTNAME; then                          
         echo " done."                                                       
     else                                                                    
         echo " failed."                                                     
         exit 1                                                              
     fi                                                                      
 else ...                                                                    
-----------------------------------------------------------------            

Where YOURHOSTNAME is the computer name (cc123456-a - or whatever yours may
be.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.12. Notes from Auburn, Alabama by Andrew W. Jones <andywjones@home.com>

I would like to note that Auburn's @home service supports DHCP. If you simply
issue `dhcpcd -h hostname` all your network settings are taken care of...
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.13. Notes from Santa Barbara, California by Tim Newsome <
nuisance@DELETE_BEFORE_SENDINGcmu.edu>

My provider (Cox@Home, in Santa Barbara, CA) does the same thing as Notes
from Hampton Roads VA, Phoenix AZ, Arlington TX and Champaign/Urbana IL. I'm
using Debian, with dhclient version 2.0. I added the following line to my /
etc/dhclient.conf: send host-name "cx803168-a"; Where cx803168-a is the
hostname I've been assigned. It is listed on the purchase order.

Information about @Home Service can be found at [http://www.home.com/] http:/
/www.home.com/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.14. Notes from Connecticut, USA

Information provided by John Cusick <JCusick@SPELLNET.com>.

In Hartford, Connecticut, TCI (now AT T) is issuing a Farallon PnP ISA
Ethernet card. This card may be detected with the isapnp tools or jumpered.
The info is on Farallon's website for this card. It is NE2000 compatible.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3. RoadRunner

RoadRunner is an Internet cable service provided by Excalibur Group (Time
Warner). The hardware setup consists of a cable modem produced by Motorola
and Toshiba which plugs into an ethernet card using a 10BaseT (UTP-45) cable.
From what I can gather RR uses DHCP for IP assignment. In order to set up
Linux to use DHCP you need to read the DHCP mini-HOWTO [http://www.oswg.org/
oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html.

If this doesn't work out for you you should check out [http://
www.math.uakron.edu/RoadRunner/] http://www.math.uakron.edu/RoadRunner/ for
Akron, Ohio and [http://people.qualcomm.com/karn/rr/index.html] http://
people.qualcomm.com/karn/rr/index.html for San Diego, California. It might
help solve your problem.

Another good site is [http://www.vortech.net/rrlinux/] http://www.vortech.net
/rrlinux/.

One more thing that might be worth mentioning: you will need a Windows NT,
95, or 98 or Macintosh PC for the RoadRunner installers to configure the
modem. It's not technically necessary, but they will insist, and will not
install on a Linux system. It's also best not to mention the IPFW system
while they're around.

Additional notes by Phil Baird <pjb@rocsoft.com> from Rochester, NY:

About getting hooked up initially. It is true the RR techs don't want to talk
about Linux. However, they now offer us a "self-install" that is half the
price ($50). Basically, they come out, run the cable, and make sure the
signal gets to the modem. You must supply your own nic card and do the rest
of the setup on your own.

Information about RoadRunner Service can be found at [http://www.rr.com/]
http://www.rr.com/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.4. Rogers@Home

The hardware setup consists of a cable modem produced by LanCity which plugs
into an ethernet card using a 10BaseT (UTP-45) cable.

When the cable modem is installed by Rogers@Home technicians you are assigned
a static IP address. They should also provide you with information on your
subnet mask, router (gateway) numbers and DNS numbers.

If above doesn't help you can check out Randal Leavitt's <
randal.leavitt@home.com> "Connection Notes" for Rogers@Home at [http://
members.home.net/randal.leavitt/CableModemConnectionNotes.html] http://
members.home.net/randal.leavitt/CableModemConnectionNotes.html.

Notes from Greg Jacobs <gregjacobs@home.com>

They now only give out dynamic IP's. The techs says its pretty much fixed
after first issue, they just want to use DHCP so any network changes on their
end can just be 'pushed out' so to speak.

Also Make sure any cablemodem uses ensure they don't use a DHCP server on
their cablemodem interface. The cable company gets very angry and often pull
the plug then tell you ;).

Other information about Rogers@Home Service can be found at [http://
rogers.home.com/] http://rogers.home.com/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.5. Sunflower Cablevision

This information is provided by Frank Wiles <admin@sunflower.com>:

In order to get online with Sunflower all you have to do is enable DHCP. DHCP
mini-HOWTO ( [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] http://www.oswg.org
/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html) has instructions how to set up DHCP under Linux.

Also they should contact me at admin@sunflower.com for lawrence.ks.us domains

We use DOCSIS compliant modems now, not the old Zenth stuff.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.6. Jones Intercable

This information is provided by Bob Kimble:

Jones Internet Cable supplies a Hybrid cable modem that connects to your
machine / network via 10BaseT ethernet. They provide you with a static IP
address for your machine, and another static IP address for the modem. The
modem acts as a gateway to their network. Your IP address and the modem IP
address are on the same network and have the same network mask (in my case
255.255.255.0 -- 24 bits). They also provide two DNS IP addresses which you
enter into your configuration. I just entered the numbers when I installed
Red Hat Linux 5 and it worked like a champ from the beginning. Since then I
have configured my Linux machine to enable IP masquerading and domain name
services, and it now acts as a router for my entire private network. My other
machines are connected via a private network using the addresses 192.168.0.x.
They are running Windows 95, Windows NT (Intel and Alpha) and OS/2. My Linux
machine has two IP addresses -- the one from the cable company and one from
the 192.168.0.x private network. Everything works like a champ. All six
machines can browse the web simultaneously. My kids are even able to connect
to their favorite game site, "The Realm" from Sierra.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7. GTE Worldwind

This information is provided by Blake R. Swopes (bhodi@bigfoot.com):

GTE WorldWind service is available in only a few areas (parts of California
and Florida), its home page is located at [http://www.gtecablemodem.com/]
http://www.gtecablemodem.com/.

GTE will send a technician out to hook up the cable modem to the wall, but
does not do any configuration of your computer. The cable you hook up to your
computer is the ethernet standard 10baseT (and you'll probably need to buy
your own, since the one they left with me was only about two feet long).

The technician should leave you some information about configuring your
system (IP address, gateway address, netmask, DNS addresses) and the number
for GTE's support line (1-800-GTE-VIDEO, since WorldWind is attached to GTE's
Americast cable service). If you have read the Ethernet-HOWTO and the DHCP
mini-HOWTO, you should have no trouble configuring your system to work with
WorldWind.

GTE provides one e-mail address, which they assign to you, but you can create
aliases to that account and web mail accounts through gte.net.

According to GTE, they block inbound traffic on several ports for security
purposes and to keep people from running servers that will eat into other
users' bandwidth (e.g., telnet, DNS, News, and Netbios (Good news for Windows
users)). In actual practice, I have found that I was able to telnet into my
system from remote hosts.

GTE does not provide technical support for Linux users, so you will pretty
much be on your own. My experience was that as soon as I mentioned Linux,
they tried to get me off the phone, but that might have been the particular
tech I was speaking to at the time.

GTE also advised me that they do not support users who have IBM Aptivas,
however I was able to briefly connect an IBM Aptia 2176-C77 with a SOHOWare
PCI 10/100 Ethernet Card to the service with no trouble at all.

I regularly test my connection speed through the bandwidth test at MSN (
[http://computingcentral.msn.com/topics/bandwidth/speedtest.asp] http://
computingcentral.msn.com/topics/bandwidth/speedtest.asp and regularly find my
connection speed to be between 320-390Kbps. Depending on the site, I have
seen transfers at up to 135K, though the average is probably 35-45. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.8. SpeedChoice, Phoenix, Arizona

According to Micah <peenchee@asu.edu>:

Just thought I'd let you know that in my area (Phoenix, AZ, usa) there is a
company called speedchoice that provides cable modem service. The service
uses a hybrid cable modem and the set up is almost identical to that of Jones
intercable described in the howto. See Jones Intercable. For any other issues
mail Micah.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.9. Cedar Falls Utilities Cybernet, Cedar Falls, Iowa

This information is provided thanks to Joe Breu <breu@cfu.net>

We are an ISP in Cedar Falls, Iowa that uses a mix of Zenith, Lancity, and
DOCSIS Cable Modems over our own Hybrid Fiber/Coax system. Our system uses no
proprietary connection software and is straight TCP/IP connections. We do use
DHCP, but will offer static IP addresses to customers with older Macintosh
machines or computers unable to use DHCP. We will answer basic questions if
you want to hook up a Linux box to our network but it should be drop and
surf.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.10. Telstra Big Pond Advance, Australia

This information is provided by Mike Battersby <mib@post.com>

Linux is not an officially supported platform for Telstra Big Pond Advance
cable internet. Do not report faults regarding Big Pond Advance and Linux to
them, as they will not help you.

Big Pond Advance user Shane Hyde wrote an excellent open source BIDS v2 login
client, BPALogin, which is now maintained by David Parrish. The BPALogin web
site is: [http://bpalogin.sourceforge.net/] http://bpalogin.sourceforge.net/.
Available at the same site is a page of instructions on getting BPALogin to
work with Linux: [http://bpalogin.sourceforge.net/tutorial.html] http://
bpalogin.sourceforge.net/tutorial.html .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.11. Fibertel, Buenos Aires, Argentina

This information is provided by Pablo Godel.

My name is Pablo Godel and want report that I'm using the cable service of
Fibertel in Buenos Aires, Argentina and it works perfectly with Linux.

They gave me a static IP. The brand of the cablemodem is COM21 and the model
is ComPort.

I connect it to the nic properly, configured in Linux and it worked
perfectly.

Update by Albert Claret <albert.claret@fibertel.com.ar>:

Besides the static IP/COM21 cablemodem setup you already list in the HOWTO,
the company is also providing a DHCP/motorola surfboard cablemodem service,
and AFAIK, they are planning to remove all of the static IP cablemodems and
replace them. As far as the setup for the dhcp/motorola, just firing your
plain old [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP client will get
you up and running without any problems. At present time, there are no ports
filtered by them.

More information about Fibertel can be found at [http://www.fibertel.com.ar]
http://www.fibertel.com.ar.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.12. Videotron (Videon), Canada

I don't have much information about Videotron except the fact that they use
DHCP for the assignment of IP addresses and other networking information.
Just read the DHCP mini-HOWTO and configure your system appropriately. There
is no other necessary configuration. Also important thing to note is that the
Ethernet card that Videotron distributes is a NE2000 compatible PCI card for
which you need to use.

ne2k-pci driver

Additional information from Philip Gwyn <gwynp@artware.qc.ca>:

They use Motorola CyberSURFR (sic) modems. This will give you an ethernet NIC
when you sign up. They gave me a TMC NE2000 PCI clone, which Linux recognises
as a "RealTek RTL-8029". It couldn't configure it propperly however, until I
downloaded the manufacturer's driver disk and changed the media type to
"auto-config".

While they can't guarantee to get it working with Linux, they will do a bit
of hand holding so it works. Many of the tech-support have Linux-clues, as it
were, even asking questions like "what kernel are you running?" "do you have
the latest version of dhcpcd?". When their DHCP server broke, they even
suggested I delete the cache files in /etc/dhcpcd to start over from zero, as
it were. This worked.

Additional information from Mihai Petre <mihaip@videotron.ca>:

Yes they are using DHCP for the tcp settings. You can also try posting your
problems on news.powersurfr.com newsgroup videon.linux.

As far as running servers using your cable connection according to Alex Nuta
says that "contract explicitly states that *no* servers of any kind are
permitted; HTTP, FTP or otherwise".

Additional information from Stasnilav Kogan <s_kogan@alcor.concordia.ca>:

The modem they provide is now Samsung InfoRanger (SCM-100R). The ISA card
they provide is an SMC NE2000 compatible (FCC ID: HED1661EN2). It is
necessary to configure the card from DOS to NE2000 mode before attempting to
get it to work under Linux. (Generally, this card is horrible. I replaced
with a 3Com card as soon as possible).

The technical support in Videotron is absolutely HORRIBLE. (Not to mention
Linux support). So, whoever signs up with them, should expect to work alone.
However, aside from the NIC problems, the setup was a breeze. They use DHCP,
so all the standard procedures apply.

Information provided by John Brzustowski

The following bash-style shell script, run as root, was sufficient for me to
get connected. In my case, it is a fragment from /etc/pcmcia/network but you
could equally place it by itself in /etc/init.d and link to it from /etc/
rc2.d, possibly deleting some of the network init scripts already there.
#!/bin/bash                                                                  
                                                                             
DEVICE=eth0                                                                  
                                                                             
# In the following XXXXXXXX represents the 8-digit serial number             
# affixed to the underside of the Motorola CyberSURFR modem.                 
# It is the same number the person who installed my cable link had           
# to phone in to the central office for activation.                          
# (Substitute your actual number, of course.)                                
                                                                             
SERIAL_NUM=XXXXXXXX                                                          
/sbin/ifconfig $DEVICE up 0.0.0.0                                            
/sbin/route add default dev $DEVICE                                          
rm /etc/dhcpc/dhcp*                                                          
                                                                             
# I'm not sure both the -h and the -I flags are required, but                
# this works for me.                                                         
                                                                             
/sbin/dhcpcd -h $SERIAL_NUM -I $SERIAL_NUM $DEVICE                           
. /etc/dhcpc/dhcpcd-$DEVICE.info                                             

It is also a good idea to set a hostname using the Hostname page available
via [http://home.powersurfr.com/Customers/index.cgi] http://
home.powersurfr.com/Customers/index.cgi Your dhcpcd client will receive this
hostname from Videon's server. Some linux mail set-ups require a legitimate
hostname in order to work.

Information about Videotron can be found at [http://www.videotron.ca] http://
www.videotron.ca.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.13. Telekabel (Teleweb), Austria

There are two approaches to setting up your Telekabel connection. First one
is the approach used by Andreas Kostyrka:

  * You may want to mention, that the Austrian Telekabel (Teleweb) ISP works
    with Linux. It seems quite similiar like MediaOne Express (3c509+dhcp,
    etc.)
   
  * Second there are 3COM configuration utilities for Linux (But don't fool
    around with them on a busy system, 3c509 may lock the bus if touched the
    wrong way :( ):
   
      + [ftp://ftp.redhat.com/pub/contrib/hurricane/SRPMS/
        3c5x9utils-1.0-3.src.rpm] ftp://ftp.redhat.com/pub/contrib/hurricane/
        SRPMS/3c5x9utils-1.0-3.src.rpm
       
      + [ftp://ftp.redhat.com/pub/contrib/readmes/3c5x9utils-1.0-1.README]
        ftp://ftp.redhat.com/pub/contrib/readmes/3c5x9utils-1.0-1.README
       
   

Second approach is provided by Marcel Ebmer <marcel.ebmer@chello.at>

  * Do NOT bother using dhcpcd or pump!
   
  * In case you don't know, ask the provider for your IP-address, which is
    static, for the DNSs, the Gateway and use linuxconf to configure the
    network. For Vienna: 960 60 333 is the helpdesk's telephone number They
    officially do not support linux, but you need not mention you are running
    linux.
   
  * Choose a unique name for your PC....not "localhost"
   

Information about Telekabel can be found at [http://www.telekabel.at/] http:/
/www.telekabel.at/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.14. Shaw Cable, Canada

According to Peng F. Mok <pmok@shaw.wave.ca>:

I recently signed up for a cable modem service from Shaw Cable here in
Canada, which runs under Shaw@Home brand. Shaw has been upgrading their cable
network for about a year and a half now, and now offer cable-modem service to
a number of locations across Canada. Information about the `Shaw@Home'
service can be found at [http://shaw.home.com] http://shaw.home.com General
information about Shaw Cable can be found at [http://www.shaw.ca] http://
www.shaw.ca.

I thought I'd just drop you a line to inform you that your DHCP mini-HOWTO,
was very useful in helping me set up Linux to work with my cable-modem
service, and that you might want to add `Shaw@Home' to your Cable-Modem
mini-HOWTO as another entry. I don't have specific information on the
`Shaw@Home' service yet, but from conversations I've had with Shaw technical
support it seems that `Shaw@Home' is a partnership with @Home and involves
the same features and setup procedure as that already described for @Home in
the Cable-Modem mini-HOWTO document.

In both services Shaw Cable techs will come over and bring you two pieces of
hardware -- a Motorola CyberSURFR cable-modem and either a 3Com EtherLink III
16-Bit ISA 3C509B-TPO NIC or an EtherLink XL PCI 3C900-TPO NIC. You have your
choice of either an ISA or a PCI card depending on your needs, and these
models only have the RJ-45 (UTP) connectors. The ISA cards come with PnP-mode
enabled by default, so it may be necessary to boot into DOS, disable PnP
operation, and configure the card to some base I/O address and IRQ setting
which are available. Once this is done Linux should have no problems
detecting the NIC at boot-time. I'm not sure about what needs to be done in
the case of a PCI card since I don't currently have a PC which supports
either PCI or PnP.

Note from another user:

Shaw now also issues SMC PCI ethernet cards. They give these out without
boxes or manuals. I found out that these are the SMC EtherPower PCI RJ45 card
(model 8432T). They use the DEC 21041 chip so the tulip ethernet driver is
needed for it.

If you need to set up your POP3 mailboxes you can do that at following URL:
[https://profile.home.net/Users/menu.htm] https://profile.home.net/Users/
menu.htm and you can login and setup the POP3 mailboxes that way.

Oh, and for the record, Shaw's technical support is horrendous. The best
place to go for information is the athome.users-unix newsgroup (which is not
even mentioned by any of the documentation) or please consult [http://
www.ee.ualberta.ca/~pmok/linux/] http://www.ee.ualberta.ca/~pmok/linux/.

Information provided by Eric De Schepper:

Shaw Cable Winnipeg provides the user with either a 3Com EtherLink III 16-Bit
ISA 3C509B-TPO NIC or an EtherLink XL PCI 3C900-TPO (depending on which slot
(s) you have available) and a Terayon TeraPro Cablemodem ( [http://
www.terayon.com/tools/products/view.html?phase=show&id=973669299&famid=
973595996&cat_id=9.4.1] http://www.terayon.com/tools/products/view.html?phase
=show&id=973669299&famid=973595996&cat_id=9.4.1 ). You have to disable PNP on
the NIC's - Shaw gives a static IP via DHCP.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.15. Cogeco Cable, Canada

This information is provided thanks to Sean O'Grady <sean@incisive.dhs.org>:

I have a Cable Modem through a company called Cogeco Cable located in various
parts of Canada. They are part of the "Wave" system which includes Rogers
Cable and Shaw Cable. The technical setup is different for each provider
though. They supplied me with a D-Link ethernet card (the version of that has
changed since then but I believe are still using D-Link) and a Zenith modem.
The Ip setup is easy since they use DHCP so all I did was install the DHCP
daemon and that was that. If you like you can list my e-mail address <
togrady@cgocable.net> for anyone with questions.

I contacted you awhile ago with information regarding setting up a cable
modem under Cogeco (the mail came from togrady@cgocable.net). Well I have
some updates to give you. Cogeco has now joined the @HOME network although I
haven't seen anything good come out of yet. The modems have changed as well,
instead of the old Zenith modems we now are using a Samsung InfoRanger
SCM-100R modem. The modem changed has not affected the ease of setting up
Linux with the cable modem. All that is still required is a functioning
network card and working DHCP client and you will be able to get the network
functioning quickly. Many people send questions to me regarding various cable
modem/dhcp/networking issues and as a result I have started to put together
some help pages. The are located at [http://incisive.dhs.org/] http://
incisive.dhs.org.

Additional info has been provided Craig Kossowski:

Cogeco seems to be slowly getting themselves sorted out wrt cable modems and
is now part of the set of Canadian cable companies that have cooperated on
the @Home network. A network card is provided as part of their large (but
currently waived) hookup fee; the D-Link 528CT for PCI capable systems, and,
I believe, D-Link 220T for ISA systems (and possibly PCI capable computers
that will accept the ISA card, they tried it in my roommate's system first,
only when that didn't work did they put in the PCI 528CT). I'd recommend
asking for the PCI if you have the choice, as I know that setup can work with
Linux from my experience.

Both of these are NE2000 boards to the best of my knowledge. I got the PCI
D-Link 528CT which uses the RealTek 8029 chipset, and Linux can deal with
easily. I just recompiled the kernel, and after a little hiccup due to RedHat
5.2's lilo default not looking for the kernel at /vmlinuz, I was up and
running. DHCP (with a 24 hour lease lifetime) is used for IP resolution and
everything worked automaticaly (I had selected a DHCP config when I installed
Linux, others may need to do slightly more configuration, but it doesn't
require anything non-standard). The 528 is supposedly plug & play, but I had
no problems using it in my Linux box (2.0.34). Note that you need to compile
in (either built in or module, I used built in) the PCI NE2k code, and unlike
what is implied in the Ethernet HOWTO, you don't need to also include the ISA
NE2000 code to use this chipset. I don't have experience with the ISA D-Link
220T, but I would assume it's just as easy to set up, it's listed as a
supported card in the Ethernet HOWTO.

The Cable modem I got was a great heavy thing that looks like a heatsink for
a small nuclear reactor. Nearly a square foot in desk space, made by LANcity,
and I believe rated for 10Mbps shared bandwidth on the cable subset side of
things, it has a reasonably good set of LEDs to show you what it's doing once
you figure out what each one is. While throughput will obviously vary, I see
transfer rates around 10kB/s (80kbit/s) and up during the day, to 50-60kB/s
at night, when presumably thinks are quieter on the backbone. Subjectively,
it's very fast, and beats even fast modems hands down. I haven't had it long
enough to determine uptime yet, so I can't comment there.

At the time of this writing (Jan 99), Cogeco's service runs $150 for
installation, including the card, and $39.99 a month for the service. They're
currently waiving the modem rental fee "until they are available for
purchase" but the information there is mixed from 15.04/month as of early
1999 (from the web page) to "not for some time" from their phone staff.
Included with this is up to five email addresses, and 5MB of Web space. They
also say there is a 1GB/month limit, though I'm told (by their tech support
people) that this isn't strictly enforced, and is more to discourage ftp
sites with high traffic bogging down the subnets, and to provide them with an
avenue to prevent such. Although their literature doesn't say so, additional
computers are an extra 10.70 a month, though unsupported, and you have to
provide the hub, wiring and additional ethercards if you do this, they're
basicly charging the extra for the lease of an additional IP as far as I can
tell from their information.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.16. Optimum Online, New York and Connecticut

This information is provided by Seth Greenfield <islesfan@nassau.cv.net>:

Optimum Online uses DHCP, and rrclientd in Linux, by John Clark. Check out
[http://www.netaxis.com/~wharris/optimum/index.html] http://www.netaxis.com/
~wharris/optimum/index.html for instructions on how to set up your service
with Linux.

Tell people who had private ips who have public ips now to change their /etc/
resolv.conf to look like this...
domain nassau.cv.net (or optonline.net depenind on the users mood)           
nameserver 167.206.112.3                                                     
nameserver 167.206.112.4                                                     

Other Than that its the same setup procedure note: the rrclientd software
will work if you tell it dce-server and you specify the domain as
optonline.net
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.17. Singapore Cable Vision, Singapore

This information is provided by Jieyao <jieyao@letterbox.com>:

SCV provides Motorola Cybersurfer modem connected to the network card via UTP
cable. The IP setup is easy since they use DHCP so all you need to do is 
install the dhcp daemon. If you can't make access the first time, turn the
modem off then on again.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.18. Cable Wanadoo, France and Netherlands (formerly Casema)

This information is provided by Jerome Sautret <Jerome.Sautret@wanadoo.fr>
and it applies to Wanadoo's French customers:

I just read your Cable Modem HOWTO. I live in France, and I use Cable
Wanadoo, the cable service of France Telecom, which is the main telecom
operator in France. It is available in a few cities in France at the moment,
like Angers and Metz. This service provides a dynamic IP address via DHCP. It
uses a COM 21 modem plugged in a 10BaseT Ethernet card. The IP setup is easy
just read the DHCP mini HOWTO.

Information about Netherlands is provided by Costyn van Dongen <
cvd@casema.net>:

The current Casema cable modems operate via the serial port, acting like
normal modems, answering AT commands like phone modems. The setup is really
very easy, because all the chat script needs to do is dial ATDT4. (this is in
ppp-on-dialer). Hence it uses PPP, which is unusual for most cable modems.

Relevant files are included /etc/ppp/ppp-on
DIALER_SCRIPT=/etc/ppp/ppp-on-dialer                                         
exec /usr/sbin/pppd -detach /dev/ttyS0 115200 connect $DIALER_SCRIPT &       

/etc/ppp/ppp-on-dialer
exec /usr/sbin/chat -e '' AT '' ATDT4                                        

/etc/ppp/ppp-off
#!/bin/sh                                                                    
######################################################################       
#                                                                            
# Determine the device to be terminated.                                     
#                                                                            
                                                                             
sleep 5                                                                      
                                                                             
if [ "$1" = "" ]; then                                                       
        DEVICE=ppp0                                                          
else                                                                         
        DEVICE=$1                                                            
fi                                                                           
#                                                                            
######################################################################       
#                                                                            
# If the ppp0 pid file is present then the program is running. Stop it.      
if [ -r /var/run/$DEVICE.pid ]; then                                         
        kill -INT `cat /var/run/$DEVICE.pid`                                 
#                                                                            
# If the kill did not work then there is no process running for this         
# pid. It may also mean that the lock file will be left. You may wish        
# to delete the lock file at the same time.                                  
        if [ ! "$?" = "0" ]; then                                            
                rm -f /var/run/$DEVICE.pid                                   
                echo "ERROR: Removed stale pid file"                         
                exit 1                                                       
        fi                                                                   
#                                                                            
# Success. Let pppd clean up its own junk.                                   
        echo "PPP link to $DEVICE terminated."                               
        exit 0                                                               
fi                                                                           
#                                                                            
# The ppp process is not running for ppp0                                    
echo "ERROR: PPP link is not active on $DEVICE"                              
exit 1                                                                       

/etc/ppp/keepalive.sh
#!/bin/sh                                                                    
                                                                             
# keepalive.sh                                                               
                                                                             
# This is a keepalive script for the Casema cable modems. This script was    
# lifted from the /usr/doc/HOWTO/unmaintained/mini/Dynamic-IP-Hacks          
# document. There should be an entry in your crontab looking like:           
# */2 * * * * /etc/ppp/keepalive.sh                                          
# to run this script every 2 minutes to see if your connection is still      
# up, if not, gracefully kill the pppd process and remake it.                
# Modify paths as necessary.                                                 
                                                                             
                                                                             
if [ -f /var/run/ppp0.pid ]; then                                            
 ping -c4 -l3 195.96.96.97 2>&1 | grep "0 packets" > /dev/null && \          
 { /etc/ppp/ppp-off > /dev/null 2>&1 ; sleep 2 ; /etc/ppp/ppp-on }           
else                                                                         
 /etc/ppp/ppp-on                                                             
fi                                                                           

/etc/resolv.conf
search dynip.com                                                             
nameserver 195.96.96.97                                                      
nameserver 195.96.96.33                                                      

/etc/sysconfig/network (this file applies only to RedHat and Mandrake
distributions, adapt accordingly for other distributions)
GATEWAYDEV=ppp0                                                              
GATEWAY=195.96.96.97                                                         

I've documented some things in the files themselves. The ppp-on script is
called during boot time from /etc/rc.d/init.d/ppp and the ppp-off script
during shutdown. The ppp-on-dialer is called from the ppp-on script. The
keepalive script for keeping the connection alive as long as the computer is
on (might as well, right?) is called from crontab (see the keepalive file for
details). The /etc/sysconfig/network file specifies the default gateway for
routing. The resolv.conf tells the computer which IP of casema.net to send
DNS queries to (this is pretty standard across all unixes, I believe).

I've forgotten to include the /etc/ppp/pap-secrets which should be the same
as the ExpressNet, Maryland, Maryland. There's also the question of the
ip-up, ip-down. These however, didn't need to be changed. I've also included
the options.ttyS0 file, which should be in /etc/ppp/ppp-on. It is read by the
pppd daemon as it logs on. There are a couple options like defaultrouteadd
that should be on. ttyS0 is the port where you install your modem mine is on
COM1 == ttyS0. Change accordingly.

/etc/ppp/options.ttyS0
asyncmap 0                                                                   
crtscts                                                                      
defaultroute                                                                 
lock                                                                         
modem                                                                        
name cvd                                                                     

I received notice from Casema a couple days ago that they will be changing
their name to [http://www.wanadoo.nl/] wanadoo.nl. So you might, in your
document, refer to both: "wanadoo.nl (formerly casema.net)" This will be
happening as of Sept. 20th.

I will be happy to provide you with information and answer any more
questions. I my explanations aren't Red Hat only. I haven't used other
systems, so I can't judge. I hope this is useful to you.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.19. Prime Cable Expressnet, Las Vegas, NV

This information is provided by jedi <jedi@penguin.lcvm.com>:

They use the Com21 which can either be connected directly to your 10baseT
input or inserted into the downlink input on your router. Static IPs are
available for $10 per month and the usual address assignment is through DHCP
( [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] http://www.oswg.org/
oswg-nightly/DHCP.html )

More information can be obtained from [http://penguin.lvcm.com] http://
penguin.lvcm.com.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.20. Chello Belgium, formerly TVD, Belgium

This information is provided by Pierre-Yves Keldermans <pykeldermans@usa.net
>:

At home, my cable-TV company is "TVD", it is the first company to offer
internet on the cable in Belgium.

  * Hardware : LanCity cable modem & 10-Base-T NIC ( DLink ISA if you buy it
    from TVD )
   
  * Config : DHCP ( [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] http://
    www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html )
   
  * Prices :
   
      + Cheap : for home use, real IP address but dynamic, DHCP expires every
        10 min, 1 user only (theorically ... ), no problem with firewall, the
        web server on my computer is even reachable from outside..., full
        speed FROM internet, small speed TO internet.
       
      + Not so cheap : for small office use, same as 1) but not limited to 1
        user and more speed TO internet.
       
      + Expensive : for WWW servers & ... , Static IP addresses and reserved
        bandwidth TO internet following price.
       
   
  * Speed :
   
      + From TVD's mirror site : up to 30Kbytes/sec, very nice ( and YES,
        they have some Linux mirrors like redhat ... :-) )
       
      + From internet : variable but rather good if the remote server isn't
        overloaded.
       
   
  * For more info : [http://www.chello.be] http://www.chello.be and [http://
    www.upcbelgium.be/] http://www.upcbelgium.be/.
   

Note from another user:

TVD gives you an IP via DHCP and when it is activated they log the
MAC-Address. So if you want to connect to the internet via another computer
with another ethernetcard it won't work. You have to change your MAC-Address
to the 1 that can connect. I just put somewhere in a startupscript :
ifconfig eth0 hw ether 00:23:56:74:25:12                                     

This was not all, TVD gives some problems with pump in RedHat 6.2 but with
DHCPcd 1.3 it works like a charm. (that dhcpcd is on the install cd in Redhat
/rpms)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.21. Telenet Vlaanderen, Belgium

This information provided by Karel Goderis <karel.goderis@pandora.be> and
Kris Carlier <kris@iguana.be>:

  * Operator: Telenet Vlaanderen - Operatial in flemish speaking (northern)
    part of Belgium
   
  * Hardware: Motorola CyberSURFR Wave Cable Modem using an RJ-45 Ethernet
    straight cable to a PC
   
  * Software: Standard config is Windoze + Modified Netscape for newbie
    installations, although Linux i386 support is there under the form of
    mirrored redhat.com software on the internal ftp servers. A dedicated
    linux newsgroup is available for support. Most users depend on ipchains/
    ipfwadm in 2.2.x, or have a "Linux Router"-project implementation.
   
  * IP Setup: DHCP address assignment, single address only. Outgoing : all
    ports accepted, except mandatory use of Netscape Proxy on port 8080, and
    thus port 80 blocked. Incoming : ports 0-1024 blocked, but re-allocation
    of ports on Linux works fine.
   
  * Pricing: Installation is 8000,- BFr (~200US$), warranty of 2000,- BFr for
    the cablemodem (50$). They ask 50$ for a NIC if you don't have any, which
    is of course a ripoff, as you get them almost for free if you buy a
    hamburger these days. Monthly fee still is 1500,- BFr (37,5$)
   
    Optional: Telenet Internet + : here, you can install a HUB (which they'll
    sell you for 50$ if you don't have any). This way you can hook up up to 4
    PC's to your connection. Higher installation price and about 1000,- BFr
    per PC per month extra.
   
    Telenet XL: standard, you can download up to 10 GB per month, 20% of that
    may be upload traffic. The XL costs 3500,- per month (88$), and you get
    15 GB download. 2000,- BFr (50$) per extra 5 GB.
   
  * Services: redhat.com netscape.com mirrors, quake I and II servers, proxy
    (5 NetCAcHe proxies proxy[1-5].pandora.be:8080), mail relay and pop
    account with 10 MB mailbox (5 aliases) and the other usual stuff you need
    to survive on the net.
   
  * Caveats: Telenet states that you can download 300Mbytes/month, but this
    rule is not enforced unless there is a obvious abuse (i.e. you download
    300Mbytes/*day* ;-) ).
   
    Till 2 weeks ago, the limits were only for external traffic. As they have
    mirrors of all kinds of things (tucows, freebsd, freethemes,
    allmacintosh, suse,...), and a proxy, the 2 GB per week they had before,
    counted only for external traffic, was OK. Now EVERYTHING is counted,
    including DHCP-traffic (30' leases), ARP, IGMP (they are experimenting
    with it so every 2' you get some traffic from them...)
   
    Blocked outgoing ports: apart from what Karel specified, 25 is also
    blocked, you have to use their mailserver. From time to time this beast
    seams to be pretty overloaded.
   

More info at [http://www.pandora.be/] http://www.pandora.be/ or [http://
www.telenet.be/] http://www.telenet.be/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.22. Total-Web, United States

This information is provided by iota <iota@inaxx.net>:

I work for Convergence.com, a cable internet company who provides the network
monitoring, technical support, and advice to cable providers (who, in turn,
provide the internet service to their customers). Most of our markets are
through Cablevision, one of the more popular cable providers in the eastern
US. The service name that they operate their cable internet service under is
"Total-Web". Customers are provided with a static IP; simply set this up like
you would any other ethernet device under Linux. The modems we use are
LanCity LCP's and COM21 ComPort's, but these devices should be transparent to
your computer.

Total-Web is available in limited areas, including: Miami Beach, FL; Gwinnett
County and Roswell, GA; Cookeville, Lebanon, and Columbia, TN; and many other
test markets.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.23. CyberCable, Paris, France

This information is provided by David Monniaux:

CyberCable gives you an ethernet card if you need one. It is a cheap NE2000
clone, ISA-Pnp or PCI I think. They only know how to set up the stuff for
Windows, but reports from other people say that they let you use their access
with other systems, provided you do the software setup yourself.

They use [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP (DHCPcd) in RedHat
and it worked immediately. In RedHat's netcfg, this means selecting "DHCP
configuration". There are still some problems sometimes: DHCP outputs some
error messages, but things still work afterwards generally (?). This seems
related to rebooting; it looks like the cable system doesn't reallocate the
line for one minute after reboot.

CyberCable's web site is at [http://www.cybercable.fr/] http://
www.cybercable.fr/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.24. Chello (UPC) Stockholm, Sweden (formerly StjärnTV)

This information is provided by <dinky@chello.se>:

UPC are providing their customers with SURFboard SB31000 Cable Modems, and if
needed a NetGear Network card(ISA or PCI) can be purchased for an additional
300 swedish crows.

They offer 2 different services: Chello: 1 IP 512kbit downstream 128 upstream
Chello Maestero: 4 IPs, 640kbit downstream, 128kbit upstream

[http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP is used to configure the
network interface (dhcpcd).

More info about their services can be found at [http://www.upc.se] http://
www.chello.se/ and [http://www.upc.se] http://www.upc.se/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.25. GCI.Net, Alaska

This information is provided by GCI Tech Support <support@gci.net>:

GCI provides CableModem services in Alaska, currently in Anchorage, Juneau,
and Fairbanks. GCI uses Com21 which can either be connected directly to your
10baseT input or inserted into the downlink input on your router. Static IPs
are available for $10 per month and the usual address assignment is through
[http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP. More information can be
obtained from [http://www.gci.net] http://www.gci.net.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.26. Saturn Communication NZ Ltd, New Zealand

This information is provided by Nigel Win <nigelwin@the.net.nz> and David
Sims <david.sims@paradise.net.nz>:

This was tested on Debian 2.1 (Slink) Using Kernel 2.0.34 and 2.2.17

First of all you need to get the following information to fill in the gaps

IPADDR -> This is the IP Address Saturn have given you eg IPADDR=
203.79.92.214

NETWORK -> This is the first 3 Decimal places of your IP Address and then 0
at the end eg NETWORK=203.79.92.0

BROADCAST -> This is the first 3 Decimal places of your IP Address and then
255 at the end eg BROADCAST=203.79.92.255

GATEWAY -> This is the first 3 Decimal places of your IP Address and then 1
at the end eg GATEWAY=203.79.92.1

Edit the file /etc/init.d/network and put this in to setup your cable modem.
#! /bin/sh                                                                   
ifconfig lo 127.0.0.1                                                        
route add -net 127.0.0.0                                                     
IPADDR=                                                                      
NETMASK=255.255.255.0                                                        
NETWORK=                                                                     
BROADCAST=                                                                   
GATEWAY=                                                                     
ifconfig eth0 ${IPADDR} netmask ${NETMASK} broadcast                         
${BROADCAST}                                                                 
route add -net ${NETWORK}                                                    
[ "${GATEWAY}" ] && route add default gw ${GATEWAY} metric 1                 

This is what my /etc/init.d/network file would look like
#! /bin/sh                                                                   
ifconfig lo 127.0.0.1                                                        
route add -net 127.0.0.0                                                     
IPADDR=203.79.92.214                                                         
NETMASK=255.255.255.0                                                        
NETWORK=203.79.92.0                                                          
BROADCAST=203.79.92.255                                                      
GATEWAY=203.79.92.1                                                          
ifconfig eth0 ${IPADDR} netmask ${NETMASK} broadcast                         
${BROADCAST}                                                                 
route add -net ${NETWORK}                                                    
[ "${GATEWAY}" ] && route add default gw ${GATEWAY} metric                   
1                                                                            

They use Com21 Cable Modem [http://www.com21.com] http://www.com21.com and
provide free D-Link PCI or ISA network card if you require. The monthly fee
already includes Cable Modem rental and they offer 2 connection speed plans (
512k/128k and 2Mbps/256K ). But they charge you on how much traffic you
transfer :). The speed is not bad since I am getting around 90K for download
speed at peak time.

Information provided by Stewart Frater

For Redhat users, the suggested scripting should be added to the /etc/
sysconfig/network file (as opposed to the /etc/init.d/network file as
detailed). In any event, the scripted change may be checked for effectiveness
by issuing the following command as root :
/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifup eth0                                     

A final check is to ping an external IP successfully. You should also expect
to be able to hot-swap your cable between your Linux and Win boxes at will;
ie. no rebooting of pc's or re-cycling of modems should be necessary during
normal use.

More info about Saturn is available at [http://www.saturn.co.nz] http://
www.saturn.co.nz.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.27. Chello, Netherlands

This information is provided by Jaco de Groot <jaco@dynasol.com>:

I'm from The Netherlands and use a Terayon cable modem under Red Hat 6.0. My
provider is Chello. I have installation instructions in Dutch on my homepage
[http://www.dynasol.nl/~jaco/redhat6.0/install.html] http://www.dynasol.nl/
~jaco/redhat6.0/install.html. Chello has replaced all LAN-City modem in my
city with Terayon modems (configuration remains the same because it uses the
same network card).

If you are not using RedHat check out the [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/
DHCP.html] DHCP mini-HOWTO on instructions how you can get your computer to
connect to Chello network.

Notes from Henkjan Huisman <henkjan@m14-017.azn.nl>

Got my RH6.1 box on the net by installing dhcp3.0 ( [ftp://ftp.isc.org/isc/
dhcp/] ftp://ftp.isc.org/isc/dhcp/dhcp-3.0b2pl6.tar.gz), and produce an EMPTY
/etc/dhclient.conf. Change /sbin/ifup where it says:

if /sbin/pump $PUMPARGS -i $DEVICE ; then

to:

if /sbin/dhclient $DEVICE ; then

Info about Chello can be found at [http://www.chello.nl/] http://
www.chello.nl/
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.28. Adelphia Powerlink, USA

This information is provided by Kevin Pfohl <kspfohl@adelphia.net>:

If you have a Adelphia service with a two way modem connection (e.g. you
don't need a regular phone modem to dial in) all you have to do is install
Linux and use [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP to get your
network connection going. If you have a one-way modem please read info on 
Adelphia Powerlink, USA.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.29. 21st Century Telecom, Chicago, IL, USA

This information is provided by Jens B. Jorgensen <jjorgens@bdsinc.com>:

21st Century uses a "Regular" cable modem, that is up-stream and down-stream
are both over the cable connection. The equipment is made by Zenith. The
installer will bring along a NIC with them, (mine was an OEM Intel
EtherExpress Pro 10/100) which is connected via a 10-base-T cable
(crossover?) directly to the cable modem. All 21st Century customers are
assigned a static IP address. Just make sure your kernel is configured to
support this card or insmod the module for it a configure the IP. You'll also
be provided with a gateway address which you'll need to set the default route
to. Be mindful of the netmask (255.255.0.0 for me) on the ether interface.
Also note that the cable modem seems to 'learn' the ethernet address of the
adapter you're provided with and will only work wit that adapter. I don't
know if reseting the cable modem would cause it to relearn the address or
not. I didn't feel the need to try the cable modem with another adapter.

Additional notes by Mark Howard <mark@xanderbelly.com>

Please note that this service has been changed; they now only use Nortel
cable modems and everyone is assigned a dynamic IP address now. Also, my
Nortel cable modem does not seem to care which machine or MAC address is
connected to it; I have set up multiple machines on it and they all worked
fine. In fact, if you hang a hub directly off the cable modem, you can get
multiple valid IP adresses assigned through DHCP! I wouldn't recommend this,
however, as a long term solution. I have a RH box set up as a firewall doing
NAT for me on the one address, and it works just great. This service is
particularly good - I consistently get 95-100KBps, or just about a 1Mbps
rate. I also live in a coach house rental here in Chicago, and although they
wanted to run new cable in the apartment, I told them to use the old cable
because it was not my place. They said they could not guarantee that the
service would work, but of course it does work just fine! So don't let them
talk you into running new cable if you can avoid it.

Also, if you want to set up your own web server from home, I used a great
service called [http://www.easydns.com/] EasyDNS.com where you pay them $25
per year per domain and you can control your DNS settings (even SOA, TTL,
etc...) 24/7/265 through a web based (PHP no less) interface. So if I ever
need to reboot my Linux box (which I never do really) I can go in and update
the IP address that my web server www.xanderbelly.com and mail server

Additional notes:

The terms and conditions of 21st Century cable modem contains the following
statement:

Distributing unsolicited information in any manner is prohibited on 21st
Century's network and will result in termination of 21st Century service.
(I.e. junk email, etc...) Any use of a server type application or service on
a computer system connected to 21st Century Cable Modem Service is prohibited
and may result in termination of 21st Century Cable Modem Service (i.e. web,
ftp, or game servers, etc...). 21st Century Cable Modem Service is for client
type applications ONLY.

Also, technically, each additional dynamic IP address beyond the first one
carries a $4.95 monthly charge.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.30. HTVi, Helsinki, Finland

This information is provided by Markku Immonen <wired.poet@sci.fi>:

HTV is the local cable TV company. Their Internet product is called HTVi.
They issue a Motorola CYBERSURFR Wave cable modem for all customers. It plugs
into an ethernet card using a 10BaseT (RJ-45) cable. Customers have two
options: [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP or a static IP
address. The [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP (dynamic IP
address) option is 50 Finnish marks cheaper; in October 1999 the prices were
245 FIM per month for a dynamic address and 295 FIM for a static one.

I opted for a static IP. Configuration was incredibly easy. They give you a
couple of info brochures which contain the necessary IP and networking
information.

About speed: it varies but is generally acceptable, from 30 kbytes/sec to 200
kbytes/sec. Your best bet is the early morning hours. The fastest download
speed so far was 470 kbytes/sec from a Finnish Linuxberg mirror.

More information about HTVi can be found at [http://www.htvi.net/] http://
www.htvi.net/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.31. Garden State Cable, New Jersey

This information is provided by Denis Voitenko <denis@o3m.com>:

In New Jersey Garden State Cable offers @Home. They give you a 3Com CMX
series cable modem and a SMC PCI NIC with the DIGITAL chip. It works just
perfect with the Tulip driver. They assign static IP addresses.

One more interesting thing. Unlike in most places, upstream speed is not
limited to 128kbs.

Garden State cable web pages are located at [http://www.gardenstatecable.com
/] http://www.gardenstatecable.com/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.32. Zoom Internet, Butler County, PA

This information is provided by Jim Garrison <garrison@olga.net>:

Zoom internet [http://www.zoominternet.net/] http://www.zoominternet.net/ is
a cable ISP. They provide a Bay Networks cable modem, which connects to a
10-Base-T ethernet card. The only thing required to set it up is to enable
[http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP.

Note: They provide the cable modem, but you must have your ethernet card
working properly with [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP
before the installation guys come.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.33. Charter Pipeline

This information is provided by Chris Weiss <chris@free-source.com>:

Charter gave me a 3Com cable modem that uses DHCP. I simply followed the DHCP
mini-HOWTO and my 256Kbps connection was running at over 350Kbps!
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.34. Netcabo, TV Cabo, Portugal

This information is provided by Marco Soeima <msoeima@netcabo.pt>:

It's a Portuguese ISP and it's available through TV Cabo. The hardware
consists of a RealTek ethernet card (just use the rtl8139.o module) and a
3Com U.S. Robotics CMX cable modem. The only thing required to get one's
cable access up and running is configure the ethernet card and install [http:
//www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP. After that it works like a
charm!

More information about Netcabo can be found at [http://www.netcabo.pt/] http:
//www.netcabo.pt.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.35. Supercable, Spain

This information is provided by Mario Galan <galan@arquired.es>:

The setup isn't so much different than other Cable providers. They offer a
SMC (I think) network card but you can use yours if you want. They then
install a cable modem made by com21 (http://www.com21.com). IP setup is easy
since it uses DHCP so I don't think you should have any problems under a
modern linux distribution.

For more information check out Mario's web page at [http://www.supercable.es/
%7Egabu/] http://www.supercable.es/%7Egabu/.

Last thing worth to be said is that Supercable doesn't provide support for
Linux but you can always ask your questions in news.supercable.es in the
Linux area. Their web page is located at [http://www.supercable.es/] http://
www.supercable.es/ (WARNING: get ready to download an almost 1MB of useless
Macromedia's Flash garbage).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.36. NTL, United Kingdom

This information is provided by cogNiTioN <cog-cablemodem@cognite.net>:

This assumes that you've spoken to NTL, you have the cable modem, the cable
line installed and your network card installed and recognised. You should
also have you MAC address registered with NTL. (NTL contact: [http://
www.ntl.com/cablemodems/] http://www.ntl.com/cablemodems/)

Now all you have to do is connect your cable modem to your network card and
run the DHCP client. I've found that you have to specify the username you
supplied during the registration process, on the command line: e.g. root #
dhcpcd -h cognition (substitute cognition for your user name.). For any other
problems with DHCP please check out the [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/
DHCP.html] DHCP mini-HOWTO.

I've also found that occasionally the 3COM CMX modem used needs to be
rebooted (power off, press the reset button on the back, power on) if left
connected 24/7.

Nameservers used by NTL are: 194.168.4.100 and 194.168.8.100, so those should
be added to your /etc/resolv.conf.

I've found NTL's tech support to be close to useless, most the time and they
don't officially support Linux, so you're probably better off contacting your
local LUG ([http://www.lug.org.uk/] http://www.lug.org.uk/ ), or you could
even try mailing me direct (but I don't promise to be able to respond).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.37. Virtua, São Paulo, Brazil

This information is provided by Thiago Macieira <thiagom@mail.com>:

IP is assigned dynamically via DHCP. Just run dhcpcd or pump to get the IP
and you're done. For more detailed instructions on how to get DHCP running
read the [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP mini-HOWTO.

Notes: operator blocks incoming connections to ports below 1024
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.38. Hathway, Bombay, India

This information is provided by Rishi Gangoly <rishi@w-o-i.com>:

The tech support guys at Hathway were not Linux Savvy at all, but I must say
were quite helpful. They even referred me to another customer who got Linux
to work with it. However, that person was only able to get it to work on
Linux as a stand-alone workstation and not as a gateway (as a router) for his
entire network.

Since I was not even able to get it to work as a stand-alone workstation I
knew I had a long way to go. The Windows 98 Workstation configuration was a
Celeron Workstation and it had a 10/100 D-Link Lan Card Chipset RTL 8139 .
The IP address was manually entered, so I knew that there was no DHCP Client
required etc.

Even the DNS and Gateway address was manually entered.

I was able to do a ping without any problem in Windows to any site and things
were just happening. However, I had no luck with it in Linux. I installed
Linux on the same machine (Dual Boot) to make sure there was any Hardware
compatibility problems.

I even got the workstation to hook up on the LAN successfully in Linux. So I
knew that the Lan Card was working.

I noticed that when I connected the Cable Modem to the LAN card I was not
able to see any of the Link LED light up on the LAN Card. So I figured that
could be part of the problem. I booted the PC in DOS and ran the DIAG DOS
based utility to check the configuration of the Card. I just decided to take
a chance and re-configured the LAN Card. I configured it to operate in 10
MBPS Half Duplex Mode instead of Auto Sense.

.......... Guess what..... The problem got solved ;-)

Even the lights (LED Link indicators) started to work, so all was good. ;-)
At the end of everything it all worked out. I plugged that lan card into the
linux server (since I knew it worked) and got it to work as a router /
gateway too. I still wonder why the other customer was not able to get the
Linux Box to work as a gateway for the rest of his network. That was no big
deal at all. It just worked. The Cable Modem that was used (provided by
Hathway) was a SurfBoard 3100
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.39. Siti Cable, Bangalore, India

This information is provided by Vinay Avasthi <vinay@avasthi.com>:

Zee Telefilms has partnered with Siti Cable in Bangalore, India to provide
cable modem service. I subscribed to this service and it kind of worked out
of the box from linux.

I am using Redhat 6.1 on a IBM Thinkpad 600 with Xircom Realport Ethernet
card. On autodetect links mentions that the card will be used in 10MB/s only.

Only problem that I faced was on shutdown, the system will hang while
shutting down pump. To temporarily fix the problem I just put that particular
like in rc-scripts to background.

The steps that one needs to perform are as follows.

  * - Need to have an ethernet card that works with Linux.
   
  * - Enable DHCP by using pump. For some reason dhcpd does not seem to work.
   

Only thing that I would suggest is to be careful regarding support since the
tech support do not seem to know much about software.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.40. Com Hem, Sweden

This information is provided by Zoltan Arpadffy <arpadffy@altavista.net>:

com hem [http://www.comhem.se/] http://www.comhem.se/ is a Swedish cable TV/
Internet provider, a sub-company of Telia [http://www.telia.com/] http://
www.telia.com/ the biggest Scandinavian carrier. com hem does not support any
other OS but Windows and Mac-OS (as com hem support claims ), but it is not
so complicate to set up on Linux as well.

com hem sells NetGame's cable modem (NeMo) [http://www.ngcable.com/
nemo.shtml] http://www.ngcable.com/nemo.shtml. It is a very fast and flexible
2-way cable modem with initial speed of 512 kb/s but it can be set up to 10Mb
/s by the cable provider. You can order it with or without Ethernet card. com
hem Internet service is available in the bigger cities all over Sweden.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.40.1. 1. Setting up a single node

  * set up your network card to work properly ([http://www.linuxdoc.org/HOWTO
    /Ethernet-HOWTO.html] Ethernet HOWTO)
   
  * configure DHCP to that card ([http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html]
    DHCP mini-HOWTO)
   
  * try to ping login1.telia.com (10.0.0.6)
   
  * you need a browser what supports Java-script (Netscape or Mozilla) and go
    to the login site [http://login1.telia.com/] http://login1.telia.com/
   
  * - fill in your user-name and password (provided by com hem) ... and
    you're there.
   

Network what you'd become a member is:                                       
        IP address: Assigned by com hem                                      
        Subnet mask: 255.255.255.0                                           
        Default GW: Assigned by com hem                                      
        Hostname: Assigned by com hem                                        
        Domain name: telia.com                                               
        Primary DNS server (nameserver): 10.0.0.1                            
        Secondary DNS server (nameserver): 10.0.0.2                          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.40.2. 2. Connecting your home LAN (if you have more than one machine)

We have to turn one computer to gateway (I did it with an old Pentium 66MHz/
16M)

  * install two network cards in your gateway [http://www.linuxdoc.org/HOWTO/
    NET3-4-HOWTO.html] NET3-4 HOWTO
   
  * first set up (and connect) to your LAN
   
  * second network card have to use DHCP ([http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/
    DHCP.html] DHCP mini-HOWTO)
   
  * enable ip forwarding
    net.ipv4.ip_forward = 1 in /etc/sysctl.conf or                                
    set FORWARD_IPV4 to true in /etc/sysconfig/network (RedHat or Mandrake) or by 
    echo "1" > /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forwarding                                   
   
  * set up IP masquerade ([http://www.linuxdoc.org/HOWTO/
    IP-Masquerade-HOWTO.html] IP Masquerade mini-HOWTO)
    ipchains -P forward DENY                                         
    ipchains -A forward -s your_network_here/24 -j MASQ              
    (for me it was ipchains -A forward -s 192.168.10.0/24 -j MASQ) check your
    routing table with route command... it should be something like below:
    Destination     Gateway         Genmask         Flags Metric Ref    Use Iface 
    gate.polarfox.h *               255.255.255.255 UH    0      0        0 eth0  
    telia-net       *               255.255.255.0   U     0      0        0 eth1  
    polarfox-net    *               255.255.255.0   U     0      0        0 eth0  
    127.0.0.0       *               255.0.0.0       U     0      0        0 lo    
    default         h2n5fdt22o429.t 0.0.0.0         UG    0      0        0 eth1  
    Useful literature for security issues is [http://www.linuxdoc.org/HOWTO/
    IPCHAINS-HOWTO.html] Linux IPCHAINS HOWTO 
   
  * configure default gateway for all other hosts in your LAN. On unix nodes
    it should look something like:
    Destination     Gateway         Genmask         Flags Metric Ref    Use Iface 
    sea.polarfox.ho *               255.255.255.255 UH    0      0        0 eth0  
    polarfox-net    *               255.255.255.0   U     0      0        0 eth0  
    127.0.0.0       *               255.0.0.0       U     0      0        0 lo    
    default         gate.polarfox.h 0.0.0.0         UG    0      0        0 eth0  
    Default gateway setup for other OSs you can find a very nice description
    in IP Masquerade mini-HOWTO
   
  * configure name server on your gateway DNS HOWTO or just set up your hosts
    to use Telia's name server (10.0.0.1)
   
  * log in from any host [http://login1.telia.com/] http://login1.telia.com/
    and you're on the road with all your LAN.
   

 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.40.3. You from the internet

There are no limitations in traffic, protocols or ports so far from com hem
side, So you can easily set up your web, irc or ftp server at home or in the
office. But is very uncomfortable to use URL like http://
h2n5fdt22o429.telia.com. You probably need a new usable domain name, but
there is a problem with DHCP. Anyhow there is one solution.

  * Find one independent DNS server
   
  * Buy your desired domain name
   
  * Set up the DNS server as a forwarder to you DHCP address
   

if the DNS server is running on Unix probably add to /etc/named.conf
zone "private.net"{                                                          
        type forward;                                                        
        forward only;                                                        
        forwarders{                                                          
                YOUR.DHCP.ADDRESS;                                           
        };                                                                   
};                                                                           

Set up your own DNS server to be master for your domain
zone "private.net"{                                                          
        type master;                                                         
        file "private.net-ZONE-FILE";                                        
        notify no;                                                           
};                                                                           

  * Edit the zone file as it has been written in DNS-HOWTO
   
  * Add your name server to etc/resolv.conf
   

search private.net telia.com                                                 
nameserver 127.0.0.1                                                         
nameserver 10.0.0.1                                                          

  * ... and your domain is alive
   
  * If your IP address is changing it is enough to re-set the forwarder DNS
    server and after few hours your server will be visible as usual, so far
    you are keeping your line alive
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.40.4. Problems:

  * If you don't use browser with Java-script support, you can not log in.
    Solution: there is no elegant solution. Without it you can not log in and
    open the connection.
   
  * After some network inactivity period (10-15 minutes) your connection will
    be terminated and you have to log in again... meanwhile your gateway and
    all your inner services will be unreachable from outside as well (if
    you're running some web server at home etc). Solution: start one ping
    process or even more elegant solution is to submit one cron job for every
    5-10 minutes on the gateway, to "do something" through the network.
   
    I did it with /etc/cron.d/keep-alive file when contains:
    # fake connection in order to keep line alive                    
    # every 5 minutes send some packages                             
    MAILTO=""                                                        
    */5 * * * * ping -f -c 5 ftp.sunet.se                            
   
  * Security: your computer or whole LAN is on the Internet now without any
    protection against attacks from outside.
   
    Solution: []Security-HOWTO can help you to set up your system quite safe.
    This is an important issue, you should not just bypass it. Your gateway
    should be your firewall as well.
   
  * Applications: If you have LAN at home you have to face IP masquerade
    problem with some applications as ftp, irc, Quake or RealAudio.
   
    Solution: You have to load necessary modules for proper work.
    /sbin/depmod -a                                                  
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_autofw                                    
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_ftp                                       
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_raudio                                    
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_irc                                       
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_mfw                                       
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_user                                      
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_cuseeme                                   
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_portfw                                    
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_vdolive                                   
    /sbin/modprobe ip_masq_quake                                     
   
  * DNS problem: Periodically DHCP configuration of your network interface
    will be reload (pumpd) and it will overwrite your own DNS setup in /etc/
    resolv.conf. To avoid this behavior of pump daemon add to /etc/pump.conf
    file:
    device eth1 {                                                    
        nodns                                                        
    }                                                                
   
  * Windows install: even if you are running Windows on your computer, DO NOT
    install com hem from the provided CD, because the configuration on
    Internet Explorer are permanent and even the com hem support can not help
    you to de-install :-). The problem is not serious, but you have to dig
    deep with regedit.
   
    Solution: In control panel/network set up your network card to and
    eventually DNS server to 10.0.0.1. Reboot (as usual) and log in. It's so
    easy without any complications.
   
  * Cable modem: You have to be aware that your cable modem is a peripheral
    of your computer and not a standalone network unit. So you should not
    expect that your network will survive the "modem reboot". The order is
    always: first modem and after the computer. Note: if the modem is on, you
    may reboot or switch off/on your computer without any problem.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.41. SwissOnLine HiSpeed Internet, Switzerland

This information is provided by Nick Barnes <nick@debau.ch>:

This assumes that you have registered (either on-line or via snail mail) with
SwissOnLine and you have received your cable modem, have plugged it in and
ensured that it boots correctly as per the installation instructions.

At the time of speaking, SwissOnLine HiSpeed provide COM-21 modems (http://
www.com21.com) complete with two different kinds of Antanae leads and an
antenna splitter.

You will require a standard 10BaseT ethernet cable to plug the modem into
either a network card installed in a PC or the uplink port of a 10BaseT hub.
To plug the modem into a normal hub port, you will require a crossover cable.

All information is provided to the host via DHCP, with no special parameters
needed in the call. The modem is not locked down by MAC address.

Providing it is not rebooted, the modem appears to grant the same IP address
to the host. While this is not guaranteed with anything other than the static
IP address option on the business account, I have not seen my address change
in the time I have had the modem.

Be wary of any device on your local ethernet which makes DHCP requests. The
modem is not fussy which devices it allocates addresses to and it appears to
offer the same IP address to _any_ machine which makes a DHCP request.

SwissOnLine do not support Linux directly, but they are aware of its
existance!

Notes from Thomas Holenstein <thomas@hex.ch>

I had problems installing my cable modem as well under Linux and under Win98,
because the DHCP server of swiss online did not to respond. If you encounter
similar problems, you may want call the hotline (0848 852 800). Hold the MAC
number of your modem ready if you call, you can find it at the bottom of the
modem. If you are only using linux, it might prove difficult to convince the
hotline people you did things right. It was difficult with windows already.
Be sure you get a number for your problem (Bearbeitungsnummer).

If you want to analyze the problems you may install a network sniffer: [http:
//ethereal.zing.org/] ethereal is available for linux and for windows. In my
case, I saw that I was sending bootp packages to swissonline but did not
receive bootp packages from them. However, I could get other packets.

Notes from Stefan Buckmann for SuSe users:

I use SuSE Linux (currently 7.1). I have had difficulties getting an IP
address using the supplied version of dhclient (2.0pl5-4). Suggestion for
SuSE users setting up a cable account with Swissonline : Get the latest
release of ISC DHCP (currently V3.0b2pl23), compile it and replace /sbin/
dhclient with the freshly compiled one. This solved the problems immediately.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.42. Liwest, Austria

Information provided by Bernd Haug <haug@liwest.at>:

I'm connected through an Austrian cable provider called Liwest. The support
eMail is <helpdesk@liwest.at>, the homepage is [http://www.liwest.at/] http:/
/www.liwest.at/.

The modem is a Terayon, the box gets connected via TP cable. The modem works
great with my ethernet hardware (3com 905b, vortex driver) as well under
Linux as under Windows. Macs are supported, too.

None of my Friends, who use very various hardware and/or OS(versions) have
any problems with incompatibilities.

The configuration is done manually (no DHCP, but it's *really* easy since the
information sheets are very compact & informative), customers get fixed IPs
and DNS entries. Running servers over the cable line is forbidden, no
firewall, but ports 80, 21 usw are scanned on a regular base.

Use of bandwidth is limited neither in volume nor in time.

The provider had great availability problems a while ago, but they seem more
or less fixed now; I am content with the Service. Transfers go up to ~30k
(intercontinental, too).

Please contact Bernd if you have additional questions. He has kindly agreed
to provide assistance to any current or new Linux user.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.43. Blueyonder from Telewest, United Kingdom

Information provided by Mike Watson <mike@prog99.com>:

Plugged in the ethernet card, booted up and turned on [http://www.oswg.org/
oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP.

Worked first time!! Nameservers were added to resolve.conf so I had to do
very little other than follow the home networking howto to get the IP
masquerading working.

They also dont mind people running masq'd connections or linux but will only
support a win9x setup. But when it was this easy....
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.44. CableNet, Colombia

Information provide by Marco Muskus <muskus@gamebox.net>:

CableNet uses CyberSurf from Motorola, and a 3Com 905 10Base-T Ethernet NIC.
Set up is mostly done using [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP
but some people also receive static IPs.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.45. Brutele, Belgium

Information provided by Fabrice Timmermans <Fabrice.Timmermans@ITSoftware.be
>:

Operator: BRUTELE - covers part of Brussels and South of Belgium

Hardware: Teraillon Cable Modem using an RJ-45 Ethernet straight cable to a
PC

Software: Standard config is Windows, although Linux i386 support is there
under the form of mirrored Linuxberg on the internal servers.

IP Setup: [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP address
assignment, single address only. More available depending on subscription
mode.

Pricing: one-off installation : BF 2500 (+-$ 85) + BF 5000 ($175) deposit for
the cable modem. Monthly fee : BF 1500 ($40) + Modem loan BF 500 (12$)

Services: Tucows and Linuxberg mirrors, quake I and II servers, proxy, mail
relay and pop account (3 aliases) and the other usual stuff you need to
survive on the net.

More info at [http://www.brutele.be/] http://www.brutele.be/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.46. Optus @Home, Australia

Information provided by Simon Butcher <pickle@alien.net.au>:

For Optus @Home here in Australia (Competitor to Telstra Bigpond) -
Originally they used to be running some sort of really weird DHCP server, so
a mate of mine hacked a DHCP client and got it running, but recently they've
fixed their problems and ordinary dhcpcd will run fine off the shelf. The
trick is that Optus use your "Client ID" for authentication. Your client id
is also your hostname, and if you're already running windows, your computer
name. If your computer name is CO3012345-A then that's your hostname, and
therefore your client id.

You feed dhcpcd this information and everything should run perfectly dhcpcd
-H CO3012345-A eth1.

Alternatively if you would like to use pump check out the notes of user in 
Mobile, Alabama.

A word of warning though, Optus are very strict on running servers on their
network, so before you connect linux up to Optus @Home, firewall your
computer or disable running daemons.

Optus supplies a SurfBoard SB3100 cable modem and a network card. Don't say
you've already got a NIC as they will insist you use it and not give you the
freebie. I got an SMC EZ-10 PCMCIA card.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.47. Destiny Cable, Philippines

Information provided by Juan Paolo L. Carballo <jplcarballo@mydestiny.net>:

It used to be just for our capital Manila, but has lately expanded to the
province of Cebu as well. There are only three of us Destiny Cable
subscribers in our local LUG and so far, no one yet in the province. Destiny
Cable is not the first to offer cable internet services but is the cheapest,
considering that they give a free cable TV feed in addition to unlimited
Internet access. Unlike other cable internet providers, they have Linux as an
OS option to choose when you fill up their application form.

There have two subscription options:

1. Residential                                                                               
Modem: Motorola Cybersurfer Wave                                                             
NIC: Any                                                                                     
Connection: Dynamic IP - DHCP ([http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP mini-HOWTO) 
* Free cable tv feed upon subscription.                                                      
* Free first 200 feet of cable from service point to your PC.                                
* Option to rent, lease-to-own or buy the cable modem.                                       
* Minimum of one year subscription contract.                                                 
2. Corporate                                                                 
Modem: No information but definitely not Motorola Cybersurfer                
NIC: Any                                                                     
Connection: Static IP                                                        

Destiny requires you to buy and install your own NIC/Lan card *before* they
will setup your service line. In my case, I bought a Linksys etherfast 10/100
LNE100TX ver. 2.0 PnP card and installed it in my Mandrake 7.1 (helium) box
using the tulip.c driver, version 0.91g. The NIC was recognized as: Lite-On
PNIC-II rev 37 at 0x6200, IRQ 10. When the linemen arrive, they will bring
with them only the cable modem, aside from the cable line to your pc. The
coaxial cable plugs into the modem from the data splitter on the main line,
which it shares with the cable TV. A 10BaseT Ethernet cable with RJ-45 jacks
is included with the cable modem. One end plugs into the cable modem and the
other end into the ethernet card. Finally, there are six LEDS, one each for
POWER, CABLE, PC, TEST, RD and TD. Once the power cycle has been completed,
the POWER, CABLE and PC LEDS should be on and not blinking. The TEST LED may
light up for a few seconds but this should pass. When a connection is stable,
the TEST LED is OFF and the RD "Receive" LED will blink every once in a
while. The TD "Transmit" LED will of course light up when you send data.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.48. Retecal, Spain

Information provided by David Grajal Blanco <picholas@wanadoo.es>:

Retecal [http://www.retecal.es] www.retecal.es offers a PCI network card
NE2000 compatible [Realtek 8129/8139 card] that is supported very well in
Linux. Of course you can use any card if you want.

The cablemodem is made by Com21 [www.com21.com] and retecal have a dhcp
server so it's easy to configure on a linux-box.

Of course, if you ask retecal about some support for Linux they cannot help
you. But in case of problems you can ask in the private news
[news.retecal.es] in the linux group, or if you want, you can ask in the
local lug [www.augcyl.org].

Retecal uses a proxy that caches all the traffic but it works on transparent
mode, so is unneccesary to configure.

Ah, retecal only works on a region of spain named "Castilla y Leon", and
Supercable, that is other ISP provider only works in "Andalucia"
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.49. Netvisao, Portugal

Information provided by Bruno Guerreiro <bruno dot guerreiro at ine dot pt>:

At home i've signed up with Netvisao, which is part of Cabovisao, a cable TV
Operator in Portugal. Their site is at [http://www.netvisao.pt] http://
www.netvisao.pt They have several packages with diferent bandwidth limits,
that go from 128Kbps to 512Kbps. I think theyŽre thinking about going to
increase speeds up to 2 Mbps, but there isn't much information about that The
card they supplied is a generic ne2k PCI, with DHCP assigned IP, which almost
never changes :-). The out-of-the-box installation of Linux worked perfectly.
I'm capable of running FTP , HTTP, IMAP, POP3 servers, with no problem at
all.No problems with Telnet or SSH either.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.50. Longview Cable - Cablelynx

Information provided by John Jeffers:

Cablelynx.com is a consortium of smaller cable systems that have recently
gone on line in the Texas, Arkansas, Oklahoma area.

Primarily they use DOCSIS 1.1 and up compliant cable modems such as a Terayon
LJ110. Currently they are configured like the ATT cable system.

The computer is provisioned with Ethernet and [http://www.oswg.org/
oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP is selected a host name is presented. The cable
modem returns hostname.cablelynx.com and locks into the initial MAC address.
The user then enters all his particulars including credit card from a Web
Browser. DHCP is renewed to a different IP and full access is obtained. The
only method to add different equipment is to spoof the MAC address per the AT
&T entry or to leave the equipment on and configured and phone technical
support and point out that you have changed computers in which case tech
support will make the modem change authorized MAC address/es.

I should point out that these providers are amongst the first to provide a
pure DOCSIS network (i.e. completely standardized) that will allow users to
buy any DOCSIS compliant modem and log it into the network with no contact
other than the initial webform with the cable company.

I will also point out that in Beta Site it was discovered that although this
will work most of the time a many homes have too many or very poor splitters
in line that will not give adequate bidirectional signal strength to the
cable modem that will result in the Cable LED flashing in and out to indicate
this.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.51. Soon Communications Plc, Finland

Information provided by Edvard Majakari <ed@krypton.mikroneuvos.fi>:

Soon Communications Plc is an ISP located in Tampere, Finland (former Tampere
Telephone Plc). Soon provides cable modem services for its customers, though
as of this writing (9th of May, 2001) only some of the regions in Tampere are
covered by the cable modem service.

Package offered by soon contains the cable modem (Cool alien-like
thingamajick design, manufactured by 3Com), ethernet cable, USB cable (in
Windows, you can connect the modem directly via USB cable), coaxial cable
splitter (so that you can use your TV and modem at the same time, even if you
have only one socket in the wall) and some Windows software I haven't used,
as I use it with Linux. Soon doesn't offer Linux support for the modem, but
because of the system they use (client acquires IP addresses by DHCP) it can
be used with Linux, or actually any machine capable of fetching network
information via [http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP), because
of the ethernet interface provided by the cable modem.

Installing and using the modem in Debian GNU/Linux is very simple. You should
first make sure that your network adapter is supported and installed in your
kernel (if you are unsure, type dmesg|grep eth0 in command line and you
should see a line saying eth0: (device information) etc). Also make sure that
CONFIG_PACKET and CONFIG_FILTER are defined in your kernel configuration, for
DHCP won't work without these.

After that, you might use eg. apt to install dhcp-client:
root@bespin # apt-get install dhcp-client                                    

If I remember correctly, after installing the client apt launches it right
over, and you should now be connected to the net. You can use - of course -
manual method of stopping, starting and restarting the client via script /etc
/init.d/dhcp-client.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.52. InstaNet, Oregon

Information provided by Tucker McLean <tucker@noodleroni.com>

I have some info for you on my cable ISP (InstaNet). I don't have any idea if
just my cable company (in Bend, Oregon) does this service, but here goes. The
dynamic IP is assigned via DHCP. They supplied me with a Motorola SURFboard
modem. I couldn't figure out how I'm supposed to get a pair of name servers
assigned to me, so I just typed in the IP's of some name servers. The
technician that came to my house was afraid of Linux, or something, and
almost didn't put in the RF cable for me. He did, and it works fine. I also
have a 486 as a router so I don't have to pay $10.95 /month for my 2 other
computers to guarantee them an IP address. Hope this is helpful.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Hybrid Cable modem ISPs

If you think you have the card recognized you have to now look at the entry
for your ISP. I have sorted the information according to a provider because
setups are mostly ISP specific.

This section is for people who are using so-called "hybrid" cable modems.
Hybrid modems are modems that need two hookups (connections), one to the (TV)
cable and one to the phone line. TV cable is used for downloading while phone
line is used for uploading.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1. Adelphia Powerlink, USA

Instructions on how to get your Adelphia Powerlink hybrid modem running under
Linux can be found at [http://linuxpower.cx/~cable/] http://linuxpower.cx/
~cable/
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.2. LinkExpress, Brasil

This information is provided by Rodrigo Severo <rodrigo@who.net>:

First of all, let me tell you that here we have the MMD Cable Modem from
General Instrument. We use SurfBoard 1000 ISA board for download and a
regular telephone modem for upload. I would prefer to use an external board
like the SurfBoard 1200 which is available only to corporate users, i.e.,
willing to pay US$ 200,00 instead of the regular US$ 30,00 so I found out
this driver for the internal ISA board. For home users, Linkexpress (my ISP)
just installs and supports the internal ISA board - Surfboard 1000. If you
want to use it, you have to install Windows 95/98 on your computer and let
the guy from Linkexpress install the equipment. After that, make your Linux
installation as you like.

I started from the files I downloaded from [http://linuxpower.cx/~cable/]
http://linuxpower.cx/~cable/.

Here is the relevant data:

  * ISP: LinkExpress [http://www.linkexpress.com.br] http://
    www.linkexpress.com.br
   
  * DNS: 200.252.88.20
   
  * Frequency: 351 MHz
   
  * Phone number: 321 3300
   
  * City: Brasilia
   
  * Province: Distrito Federal
   
  * Upload speed: regular 33.6K (just the download goes through the cable
    modem)
   

During a download from a local tucows mirror I got 70KB~300KB per second.
From distant sites I managed to get 30KB/s a few times.

More information about LinkExpress can be found at [http://
www.linkexpress.com.br/] http://www.linkexpress.com.br/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.3. ExpressNet, Maryland

I recently accuired an expressnet cable modem for the maryland area. it is a
com21 one way modem and I had a hell a time making it work so id like to
share my knowledge in your faq maybe? well heres what I learned inorder for
the PPP connection to authenticate the user must be running PAP which
consists of editing the /etc/ppp/pap-secrets file accordingly:
#/etc/ppp/pap-secrets                                                        
#this is the PAP secrets file for PPP                                        
#the quotes are required on both                                             
"username"      *       "password"                                           

after that they must create a PPP-on script what ever name it must execute
this command:
exec /usr/sbin/pppd debug persist /dev/ttyS1 38400 0.0.0.0:0.0.0.0 connect "chat -v TIMEOUT 3 ABORT 'BUSY' ABORT 'NOANSWER' '' ATH TIMEOUT 30 'OK' ATDTTELEPHONE CONNECT ''"

this must be done with no carrage returns either

next step is to modify the /etc/ppp/ip-up.local file if it does not exist it
should be created it should read the following:
#!/bin/bash                                                                  
#/etc/ppp/ip-up.local                                                        
#this will set up the route to the ppp device as default everytime the modem 
#authenticates dont include it if you do not want this option                
route add default ppp0                                                       

then the user must configure their ethernet card on box I have a 3c905.

I configured it the following way:
ifconfig eth0 up                                                             
ifconfig eth0 10.0.0.1 broadcast 10.0.0.15 netmask 255.255.255.240           

then I added some more routes to the kernel routing table as follows:
route add -host 10.0.0.1 eth0                                                
route add -net 10.0.0.0 eth0                                                 

all of these commands can be added into a script file as follows
#!/bin/bash                                                                     
#This is a script file for establishing the cable modem IF device properties as 
#well as the route properties                                                   
ifconfig eth0 up                                                                
ifconfig eth0 10.0.0.1 broadcast 10.0.0.15 netmask 255.255.255.240              
route add -host 10.0.0.1 eth0                                                   
route add -net 10.0.0.0 eth0                                                    

thats all and the cable modem connection is setup fast as hell I might add.

Contributors: Chris <chris@wrm.grdn.net> and Mike Milbert <mike@milbert.com>.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.4. Charter Pipeline, Riverside, CA

This information is provided by Gabriel Peters <gpx1@earthlink.net>:

(I have Charter Pipeline, Powered by Earthlink, Riverside, CA) The modem is a
Com21 ComPORT 2000.. connected to the computer via 10 BaseT ethernet cable to
a Linksys 10/100 ethernet card (Cable modem, ethernet cabling, and ethernet
card supplied) The ethernet card driver that I had to compile into the kernel
was for the DEC Tulip. auto-detected the card and set it up nicely.

This is the information I needed:
eth0 IP address - 10.0.0.1                                                   
DNS Servers - 207.217.126.81, 207.217.120.83                                 
Subnet Mask - 255.255.255.240                                                
Gateway: None                                                                
Your hostname should be CBL-(your username).hs.earthlink.net                 

Then you need to configure PPP to dial up your access number as normal.. What
I had to do to get it to work was this: I typed ifconfig eth0 down to
shutdown the ethernet, ppp-go to dial in, once it reported my IP addresses, i
typed ifconfig eth0 up and voila, it worked perfectly.

Editor's comment:

Each time PPP link is brought up or down pppd executes scripts /etc/ppp/ip-up
(link up) and /etc/ppp/ip-down (link down) so in order to have Ethernet
network go up and down with PPP link simply add:
ifconfig eth0 up                                                             

before exit 0 statement in /etc/ppp/ip-up and ifconfig eth0 down in ip-down.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.5. Chambers Cable, Chico, CA / Fundy Cable, New Brunswick

This information is provided by Brian Moore <bem@cmc.net>:

For those using Chambers Cable in Chico, CA, the product is the Scientific
Atlanta data Xcellerator(tm) modem. Mike Cumings of Cal State University
wrote a nifty driver for it, available at [http://www.ecst.csuchico.edu/
~mcumings/cablemodem/] http://www.ecst.csuchico.edu/~mcumings/cablemodem/.
This should also work for others using the same modem, such as Fundy Cable of
New Brunswick. If you encounter problems compiling the client program from
the above address try a client provided by Timothy Legge <tlegge@fundy.net>
at [http://user.fundy.net/tlegge/DataX/cable0.99-1.tar.gz] http://
user.fundy.net/tlegge/DataX/cable0.99-1.tar.gz
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.6. Smyrna Cable, Atlanta, GA

This information is provided by Blake Sorensen <librarian@unseen.net>:

I have Smyrna Connect, supported by Smyrna Cable in Atlanta, GA. They are
currently (June, 1999) using half-duplex but are scheduled to have
full-duplex within six months. The Cable Modem is a ComPort Com21. Here is
the configuration stuff I needed to get my linux box running as my dialup.

My eth0 device is a 3com ISA card set to IP 10.0.0.1, Bcast 10.0.0.255, Mask
255.255.255.0.

The machine is set to the hostname Smyrna418.smyrnacable.net where Smyrna418
is my username. I don't think this is that important, but I haven't fiddled
with it to see if it will still work once I change the hostname.

My modem is an external 56K X2 US Robotics on /dev/ttyS0.

I also have eth1 (a DEC tulip based pci card) set up as 192.168.0.1 as the
gateway for the rest of my network to masquerade behind.

Smyrna Connect does not give you DNS info for the cablemodem since you are
supposed to use the Windows PPP feature of using the default DNS for the
server you dial in to. However, they do have one that works at
209.116.152.252.

I use a ppp connection script to dial in, but the guts of it is this:
/usr/sbin/pppd modem /dev/ttyS0 persist mru 1000 asyncmap 0 \                
-detach crtscts user Smyrna??? defaultroute connect '/usr/sbin/chat \        
ABORT BUSY ABORT ERROR "" ATZ OK ATDT7704365664 CONNECT' \                   
57600 0.0.0.0:0.0.0.0 &                                                      

I keep the persist in there since Smyrna Connect has a habit of dropping the
connection every once in awhile, and this way it automatically dials back in.
You will need to replace the Smyrna??? in the above command with your own
username and put the line:
Smyrna???       Smyrna???       password                                     

in the file /etc/ppp/pap-secrets.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.7. Amnet de Costa Rica, Costa Rica

This information is provided by Roberto Salvatierra <chuby@internettico.com>:

Ok to set up a Hybrid cable modem conection using Costa Rica's Amnet Provider
is not all that hard ( once you get the hang of it ) is like the other
providers that use com21 modems, but with some minor diferences.

My Hardware is:
CableModem: Com21 ComPort 1000                                               
Modem     : Rockwell 56k                                                     
Ethernet  : Ne2k PCI clone                                                   
Machine   : i386                                                             
Os        : Debian 2.1                                                       
Kernel    : either a 2.2.x or a 2.3.x*                                       

The first thing I did was disable my whole networking system, mainly because
i had a real mess on my routing tables, hosts, and resolv.conf files ( I was
using several ISP's and an intranet ) so I opted for this but that was just
me, I even stopped lo so I started with a clean config.

okey first of all if you have a dual system ( win/linux ) make sure the
system is working under windows, that way we can make sure everything is up
and running, after that, reboot to linux**.

If you don't have a dual system I found something interesting that MIGHT help
you state if the cablemodem and the eth card are functional, first, type this
on your system:
ifconfig eth0 up                                                             
ifconfig eth0 10.0.0.1 netmask 255.255.255.240                               
route add -host 10.0.0.1 eth0                                                

after that look in your system log files for pings from 10.0.0.4 ( I have no
idea why but this machine keeps "pinging" my box ,I asked amnet's help desk
what was this all about, and they didn't give me an answer I guess they do It
to check the network integrity) well anyhow, if you get this pings means that
amnet connection is working okey.

well after we have stated that the cable modem is up and running the rest is
quite easy.

if you did the above step now lets bring eth0 down ( ifconfig eth0 down )

first lets place amnet's DNS where it sould be in /etc/resolv.conf so we need
to add this:
search amnet.co.cr                                                           
nameserver 196.40.3.10                                                       

okey now we need a ppp script for the modem

this one works: ( we all use the same username "amnet" and password
"conexion" so for this to work just cut and paste)
exec /usr/sbin/pppd /dev/ttyS1 57600 0.0.0.0:0.0.0.0 debug user amnet        
defaultroute connect "chat -v TIMEOUT 60 ABORT 'BUSY' ABORT 'NOANSWER' ''    
ATH TIMEOUT 60 'OK' ATDT2969130 CONNECT ''"                                  

amnet uses PAP (password authentication protocol) to authenticate users so we
need to add a line to /etc/ppp/pap-secrets:
"amnet" * "conexion"                                                         

okey now you need to bring ppp up so just run that script to check that it
works type: ifconfig, now you should have something like this:
ppp0      Link encap:Point-to-Point Protocol                                 
          inet addr:196.40.3.177  P-t-P:196.40.30.114  Mask:255.255.255.255  
          UP POINTOPOINT RUNNING NOARP MULTICAST  MTU:1500  Metric:1         
          RX packets:7 errors:1 dropped:0 overruns:0 frame:1                 
          TX packets:9 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 carrier:0               
          Collisions:0                                                       

   
    Important: make sure at this point that you do not have eth0 up or it
    WILL NOT WORK
   
okey after you have this working type this:
ifconfig eth0 up                                                             
ifconfig eth0 10.0.0.1 netmask 255.255.255.240                               
route add -host 10.0.0.1 eth0                                                

now type ifconfig you should have something like this:
eth0      Link encap:Ethernet  HWaddr 00:00:21:61:7C:F0                      
          inet addr:10.0.0.1  Bcast:10.255.255.255  Mask:255.255.255.240     
          UP BROADCAST RUNNING MULTICAST  MTU:1500  Metric:1                 
          RX packets:5594 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 frame:0              
          TX packets:241 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 carrier:0             
          Collisions:0                                                       
          Interrupt:11 Base address:0xde00                                   
                                                                             
ppp0      Link encap:Point-to-Point Protocol                                 
          inet addr:196.40.3.142  P-t-P:196.40.30.114  Mask:255.255.255.255  
          UP POINTOPOINT RUNNING NOARP MULTICAST  MTU:1500  Metric:1         
          RX packets:7 errors:2 dropped:0 overruns:0 frame:0                 
          TX packets:65 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 carrier:0              
          Collisions:0                                                       

and voila , your conection is up and running !!

some tips:

when you are not connected your eth should be DOWN activate eth only AFTER
ppp is running OR IT WILL NOT WORK.

To make this you can add the eth up and down scripts to /etc/ppp/ip-up and /
etc/ppp/ip-down scripts ( on debian just place them on /etc/ppp/ip-up.d and /
etc/ppp/ip-down.d )

ip-up should contain this:
ifconfig eth0 up                                                             
ifconfig eth0 10.0.0.1 netmask 255.255.255.240                               
route add -host 10.0.0.1 eth0                                                

and ip-down this:
ifconfig eth0 down                                                           

now here is a WORKING route table that might help you troubleshooting the
system: ( my HOSTN = hostname )
Destination     Gateway         Genmask         Flags Metric Ref    Use      
Iface                                                                        
HOSTN.amnet.co. *               255.255.255.255 UH    0      0        0 eth0 
196.40.30.114   *               255.255.255.255 UH    0      0        0 ppp0 
HOSTN.amnet.co. *               255.255.255.240 U     0      0        0 eth0 
default         196.40.30.114   0.0.0.0         UG    0      0        0 ppp0 

Relevant Information:
DNS      : 196.40.3.10                                                       
----- eth0 -----                                                             
IP       : 10.0.0.1                                                          
NetMask  : 255.255.255.240                                                   
Bcast    : 10.255.255.255                                                    
Gateway  : NONE                                                              
----- ppp ------                                                             
IP       : 196.40.X.X (Dhcp Pool)                                            
NetMask  : 255.255.255.255                                                   
Bcast    : Unknown                                                           
Gateway  : Self Default                                                      

that's all folks !!

if you need this in spanish look for it in: [http://www.internetTICO.com/
cablemodem.html] http://www.internetTICO.com/cablemodem.html

Questions/comments: <chuby@internettico.com>. Please use the subject
CABLEMODEM or I will not answer.

Biography: Linux Cable Modem mini-how-to Chapter: Hybrid cable modems
sections, 4.2 and 4.4

* about using 2.3.x kernels, this are unstable as anyone knows but I found
that the performace with this kernel and amnet is LOUSY ( like a 14K modem )
I DO NOT RECOMEND USING IT, but anyhow if you do use it and you get that your
machine does not have ppp do not panic just upgrade your pppd program, 2.3.x
kernels use a split async sync interface so pppd < 2.3.10 will NOT work.

** sometimes when I'm using the cable modem on windows and I reboot to linux
the modem gets "stupid" so I need to turn off the modem, the machine, then
turn on the modem and restart the machine after that it always work. I have
no Idea why this happens but I'm guessing that the ethernet card has a
different hardware address on windows and linux (wierd) and that the modem
keeps this config on an memory, and that it needs to be cleand up for it to
work, so if it was working on windows and you are not getting even a ping on
linux try this.

More info about Amnet can be obtained at [http://www.amnet.co.cr/] http://
www.amnet.co.cr/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.8. Prime Cable, Chicago, IL

This information is provided by Eric Agnew <agnew@goku.dyndns.org>:

I just got a hybrid com21 setup w/ Prime Cable in Chicago, and I have a very
important addition that will save other users (particularly debian users w/
newer kernels) a LOT of grief:

When I initially set everything up, I was able to establish the ppp
connection just fine, but the only things coming back over eth1 were
broadcast packets from an internal (10.0.0.x) network. After 3 weeks of
extreme frustration, I finally found the solution in the kernel docs under
Documentation/networking/README.sb1000:

Solution -- As root type:
echo 0 > /proc/sys/net/ipv4/conf/cm0/rp_filter'                              

so it can share the same IP address as the ppp0 interface.

The boot-time script that sets this normally on debian systems is in /etc/
init.d/networking, in the 'spoofprotect_rp_filter' function. I simply added
'echo 0 > /proc/sys/net/ipv4/conf/eth1/rp_filter' after it had done
everything else. To be sure, I also added it to a script I added to /etc/ppp/
ip-up.d that brought eth1 up if I was using the cable connection (as opposed
to my other straight-ppp connection).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.9. Millennium Digital Media, Maryland

This information is provided by Mike Miller <CableModem@mikemiller.net>:

I live in Maryland (Anne Arundel County) where my cable company is Millennium
Digital Media ( [http://millenniumdigitalmd.com/] http://
millenniumdigitalmd.com/ ), which offers Cable Modem service from Cablespeed
( [http://cablespeed.com/] http://cablespeed.com/ ). Since most areas aren't
currently upgraded to 2-way digital service, for now they're giving us a
General Instruments SURFboard SB2100D external (hybrid) cable modem (which
includes a 33.6 modem), so you plug the cable and phone line right into the
cable modem -- no need to use your own modem or set up ppp or anything. The
modem uses DHCP to determine all the settings and connect to the network, so
all I have to do it switch on the modem and it automatically dials up and
connects to the network. To get Linux working, all I had to do was load and
configure dhcpd (or dhcp-client). Since I'm using Debian, all I ran was:
   apt-get install dhcp-client                                               

and voila! I was on the net.

If you're running something other than Debian, please read DHCP mini-HOWTO at
[http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly
/DHCP.html. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.10. Rock Hill Telephone (RHTC) and Fort Mill Telephone (FMTC), South
Carolina

This information is provided by Ryan T Rhea <rhear@ruby.winthrop.edu>:

Rock Hill Telephone (RHTC) and Fort Mill Telephone (FMTC) offer hybid cable
modem access through a partnership with the Info Avenue ISP. The cable modem
is built by Hybrid, and offers high bandwidth downstream over the cable line
(I've seen 900+ kpbs), and upstream over the builtin modem (around 33.6
kbps). The cable modem connects to an ethernet 10baseT card and a regular
phone line. The cable modem acts as a router from your machine to the
internet.

RHTC and FMTC 's tech support is performed by Info Avenue, and they offer no
support for Linux whatsover. They were unable to provide any help or
documentation regarding Linux and cable modems. Luckily, I was aware through
my initial Win NT setup (as I looked over the tech's shoulder) that DHCP was
used to assign IP addresses and DNS information. What I had to learn the hard
way was that the cable modem apparently relies on the MAC address of the NIC
that it is originally installed on. In otherwords, when I went to move the
cable modem from my NT machine (which was using a proxy server and a second
NIC to share internet access) to my new Linux firewall, I had to move the NIC
into the new Linux computer. Without the same NIC, the network link light on
the back of the cable modem will never come on, and the modem will not
communicate with your computer at all. I assume if you bought a new computer
with a new NIC, you could call RHTC or FMTC and ask them to update your MAC,
however, they would probably not know what you were talking about, and want
to send a technician. When the technician gets there, expect "we do not
support Linux" to be the first words out of his mouth.

Anyway, after installing the original NIC (which probably won't be a problem
for most of you, because you only have 1 NIC in your computer - which the
tech setup under Windows), all I had to do was configure DHCP. Considering my
NIC was already working under Linux, my Mandrake Linux distribution made this
especially easy. I just type 'netconf', then choose 'Basic Host Information',
then enable DHCP for the NIC in question (in my case 'Adapter 1'). The
program should restart the device for you, if not, you may need to reboot, or
manually restart the device with ifconfig.

If you have trouble with DHCP you could check out [http://www.oswg.org/
oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] DHCP mini-HOWTO.
